**https://doi.org/10.1093/JOCCUH/uiae005** Advance access publication date 30 January 2024

**Review Article**

# **Organizational and occupational health issues with working remotely during the pandemic: a scoping review of remote work and health**

<span id="page-0-3"></span><span id="page-0-2"></span>Lynnette-Natalia Lyzwinski[1](#page-0-0),2, [\\*](#page-0-1)

- <span id="page-0-4"></span>[1](#page-0-2)Center for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute, McGill Medical School, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
- <span id="page-0-0"></span>[2](#page-0-3)Faculty of Humanities, Education, and Social Sciences, University of Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
- <span id="page-0-1"></span>[\\*](#page-0-4)Corresponding author: Lynnette Natalia Lyzwinski, [\(Dr.Lynnette.Lyzwinski@cantab.net\)](
   15589
  17532 a 15589 17532 a
   ).

#### **Abstract**

Background: Stay-at-home orders during the COVID-19 global pandemic created unprecedented challenges for workers whose work was transferred to the home setting. Little is presently known about the benefits and the challenges associated with global remote work on well-being and mental health, work-life balance, job satisfaction, productivity, home office adaptability, and gender equality. Methods: A scoping review of PubMed/Medline was undertaken in October 2021 to better understand these broad dimensions associated with remote worker health, well-being, and the home office workspace. The review focused on white-collar workers who undertook remote work during each of the lockdown waves from March 2020 to 2021.

Results: A total of 62 studies were included in the review, which spanned Asia, North America, South America, and Europe. Overall, workers seemed to enjoy remote work, but productivity varied. The main setbacks associated with remote work included feelings of isolation and loneliness, which negatively inf luenced well-being. Social support from management and contact with colleagues mitigated this. Leadership style also inf luenced remote worker well-being. Overall, women suffered from lower levels of remote work well-being and productivity, especially if they had children. The home office and its adaptability were integral for successful remote work. Work-life balance was affected in some workers who struggled with heavier workloads or family duties.

Conclusions: To promote well-being and successful remote work, isolation and loneliness should be reduced through greater contact with colleagues and managers. Managers should promote family friendly policies that may support work-life balance and reduce gender inequities in remote work.

## **Key points**

#### **What is already known about the topic**

- Remote work increased during the pandemic as a result of isolation measures and new working-from-home policies.
- Remote work introduced new challenges and benefits.
- Research on the workplace environment and health has shown that work can impact health and well-being.

#### **What this study adds**

- This research presents the unique challenges and benefits that were identified with working remotely.
- This review addresses health and well-being issues that are specific to remote work, beyond simply exploring the physical work office.

#### **How might this study affect research and policy?**

- The review makes recommendations that could inf luence organizational working relationships and working-from-home policies.
- These include recommendations for promoting psychological well-being during remote work such as reducing isolation and loneliness.
- It also includes recommendations on organizational leadership and management approaches.
- It makes recommendations for the home office space.

**Keywords:** remote work; telework; COVID-19; well-being; mental health; stress; workplace; productivity; job satisfaction; leadership; work-life balance.

# **Background**

During the unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic, the mental health and well-being of adults around the globe was impacted[.1](#page-17-0) A systematic review found high rates of depression, anxiety, and stress symptoms in China, Denmark, Sweden, Spain, Italy, Turkey, Iran, and Nepal. Although the prevalence of mental health issues varied by country and assessment method, the prevalence of depressive symptoms was high and ranged from 14% to 48% and 6% to 50% for anxiety symptoms, assessed using validated scales[.1](#page-17-0) Workplace mental health is especially relevant, given the sudden changes in workforce dynamics that the pandemic had brought on. Job loss and financial insecurity were just some stressors that employees faced during the pandemic[.2,](#page-17-1)[3](#page-17-2) The sudden transition to working from home during lockdown and stay-at-home hygienic public health orders brought on unprecedented stressors for workers including creating a homeoffice space, work-life balance challenges, adjusting to telework or online work, and lack of clarity surrounding roles.[4](#page-17-3)-[6](#page-17-4) According to research in Luxembourg, 1 in 3 employees suffered from a decline in their mental health[.7](#page-17-5) In addition to this, perceptions of fear, safety, and losing a loved one during COVID were raised as major issues that working adults faced when trying to adjust to the "new normal.["8](#page-17-6) It is especially timely to better understand how employers around the world worked towards promoting wellbeing, buffering against stress and mental health problems in remote workers during times of uncertainty.

<span id="page-1-6"></span><span id="page-1-5"></span>Additionally, more research is needed to better understand the benefits and barriers of remote work for well-being and how they vary by gender. Women have been disproportionately affected by the pandemic and they report lower levels of wellbeing and mental health compared with men[,9,](#page-17-7)[10](#page-17-8) although this was the case even before the pandemic. They are also affected by inequitable job loss relative to men; 54% of women lost their jobs during the pandemic when they represented only 39% of the working population[.11](#page-17-9) There is also evidence that some women were exposed to increased levels of domestic violence during the pandemic, resulting in new occupational hazards when working from home[.12](#page-17-10) These new work inequities and occupational hazards in the home-office have never been previously studied.

<span id="page-1-10"></span><span id="page-1-9"></span>Finally, little is known about the presumed interplay between remote working life, productivity, job satisfaction, work-life balance, and well-being. [Table](#page-2-0) [1.](#page-2-0) summarizes the various definitions of these constructs, as previously used in the literature. Given that for many people work has moved into the home sphere, the boundary between work and personal life may have become less clear. It is important to understand how remote workers maintained a work-life balance during the pandemic because it is integral for well-being[.13](#page-17-11) There is meta-analytic evidence that stress and mental well-being are associated with job satisfaction, [14](#page-17-12) but it is currently unclear how remote work has impacted global job satisfaction. Additionally, health-related sick leave affects productivity and the economy[.15](#page-17-13) It is presently unclear how productivity was affected during remote working life, and whether inequities exist between men and women, different countries, and diverse white-collar jobs.

<span id="page-1-15"></span><span id="page-1-14"></span><span id="page-1-13"></span><span id="page-1-11"></span>As remote work has become almost ubiquitous in non–servicerelated jobs during the COVID-19 pandemic, it is likely to remain to some extent in the future[.16](#page-17-14) Murphy[16](#page-17-14) theorizes that should remote working remain, it will bring its challenges for managers and create gender inequity for women, but employees may find a general preference for this form of work arrangement overall. Kniffin et al[17](#page-17-15) had previously undertaken a scoping review of <span id="page-1-0"></span>studies that had been published prior to the pandemic to inform theoretical areas of research including how the pandemic might shape virtual teams, leadership and management, and well-being. A comprehensive updated review is needed that will explore changes in work dynamics, not only in 2020 but also throughout 2021, in order to better understand relationships between remote work, work-life balance, productivity, job satisfaction, and the role leaderships plays. It is also useful for future pandemic preparedness. Gaining a clearer understanding may assist with establishing remote workplace policies that support remote workplace well-being as well as satisfaction with remote work and productivity. Furthermore, interventions may be developed to promote the well-being and success of remote workers by targeting barriers associated with remote work and facilitators. Finally, by better evaluating differences between men and women, future interventions and policies may be better tailored to reduce inequities and promote diverse remote worker well-being.

# <span id="page-1-4"></span><span id="page-1-3"></span><span id="page-1-2"></span><span id="page-1-1"></span>**Aims and objectives**

The broad objectives of this review were to summarize the evidence surrounding white-collar employee well-being and remote work. The rationale for focusing on white-collar rather than bluecollar workers is because white-collar jobs could be performed from the "home office" setting during stay-at-home remote work orders when compared with more technical, hands-on jobs, which could only be performed on site by the physical workforce.

The aims of this review were to:

- 1. Identify the factors affecting employee well-being or acting as buffers against stress while working from home. Determine whether these factors vary by gender and occupation.
- <span id="page-1-8"></span><span id="page-1-7"></span>2. Better understand how remote work affects work-life balance, job productivity, job satisfaction, and the role of management.
- 3. Identify the role of leadership and management to foster employee well-being and work under these circumstances.

# **Methods**

A scoping review of PubMed (Medline) and Google Scholar was undertaken in October 2021 to identify relevant studies to our research questions. The search terms included word variations for "well-being" and "stress" and "remote work" and "work-life balance" and "productivity" and "job satisfaction." The search strings were combined into 1 large search string that is most relevant to our research questions ([Table](#page-2-1) [2](#page-2-1)). Keywords included medical subject headings (MESH) terms, free text, word variations, and truncation. A medical librarian was consulted with the search strategy. Manual hand searches of references were also undertaken. The PubMed/Medline search strategy example is given in [Table](#page-2-1) [2](#page-2-1).

#### <span id="page-1-12"></span>**Inclusion and exclusion criteria**

This review broadly included all studies in white-collar workers over 18 years of age. Studies must have been undertaken during the COVID-19 epidemic, while employees worked remotely from home. Studies must have been published in the English language or in one of the languages that the co-authors were f luent in such as French, German, Polish, or Italian. Intervention studies were excluded. Studies were excluded if they did not assess well-being, stress, or workplace satisfaction. Studies on pain were included if they measured 1 or more work-related indicators or mental

<span id="page-2-0"></span>**Table 1.** Definitions of essential remote work dimensions.

| Element                             | Definition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Work-life balance                   | Work-life balance is defined as harmony between one's personal or private life (eg, leisure, socializing, and family) and<br>one's working life. When there is imbalance, work may take over one's time allocated to pleasure and family18,19                                       |
| Job satisfaction                    | Job satisfaction can be conceptualized as the satisfaction and pleasure with one's work including finding meaning and<br>purpose in work and with the working built and social environment.20–22                                                                                    |
| Productivity                        | Productivity in the workplace is defined as the output that a person or whole company produces within a period of<br>time during work, sometimes described as the rate at which goods and services are produced.23,24                                                               |
| Well-being                          | Well-being is a state of happiness and living well. Broadly defined by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), it<br>encompasses positive sentiments and general fulfilment, and spans physical, emotional, social, psychological<br>well-being, and overall life satisfaction.25,26 |
| Workplace well-being<br>Flourishing | Broad concept that includes occupational health and safety and positive perceptions of the workplace.27,28<br>Concept from positive psychology, focused on living one's best life even with limitations (eg, living with an illness or<br>disability).29                            |

#### <span id="page-2-13"></span><span id="page-2-1"></span>**Table 2.** PubMed/ Medline search strategy.

(("Personal Satisfaction"[Mesh] OR well being[tiab] OR wellbeing[tiab] OR life satisfaction[tiab] OR personal satisfaction[tiab] OR wellness[tiab] OR "Burnout, Professional"[Mesh] OR fatigue[tiab] OR tired∗[tiab] OR depress∗[tiab] OR anxiety[tiab] OR "Mental Health"[Mesh] OR "Stress, Psychological"[Mesh] OR stress[tiab] OR mental health[tiab]) OR job satisfaction OR productivity AND ("Teleworking"[Mesh] OR work from home[tiab] OR working from home[tiab] OR "Telecommuting" OR telecommute[tiab] OR Work[Mesh:NoExp] OR Workplace[Mesh:NoExp] OR Employee[tiab] OR workplace∗[tiab] OR worksite∗[tiab] OR "work place"[tiab] OR "work places"[tiab] OR "work site"[tiab] OR "work sites"[tiab] OR "work setting"[tiab] OR "work settings"[tiab] OR "work environment"[tiab] OR "work location"[tiab] OR "work locations"[tiab] OR job[ti] OR work∗[ti])) AND (coronavirus[tiab] OR "covid 19" OR "2019 ncov"[tiab] OR "2019 ncov"[tiab] OR corona virus disease 2019[tiab] OR corona virus[tiab] OR coronavirus disease 2019[tiab] OR coronavirus[ti] OR coronaviruses[ti] OR COVID[tiab] OR covid19 OR covid-19[tiab] OR nCov 2019[tiab] OR nCov[tiab] OR new corona virus[tiab] OR new coronavirus[tiab] OR new coronaviruses[all] OR novel corona virus[tiab] OR novel coronavirus[tiab] OR novel coronaviruses[all] OR SARS Coronavirus 2[all] OR SARS-COV-2[tiab] OR Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2[tiab] OR "COVID-19"[nm] OR "novel CoV" OR "Coronavirus Infections"[Mesh] OR "Coronavirus"[Mesh] OR "Betacoronavirus"[Mesh] OR "CoV 2" OR "Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2"[nm])

health (stress or well-being as well). Studies were also excluded if they were not undertaken in remote workers, and before COVID-19. Studies that assessed well-being longitudinally including right before COVID-19 and throughout the pandemic were included. Studies were excluded if they primarily evaluated return to work in the actual workplace after lockdown and stay-at-home remote work measures were lifted. Studies were screened against the inclusion and exclusion criteria at the abstract and title, followed by full-text stages.

# **Data extraction**

Data on study characteristics and participant demographics as well as health outcomes and work-related measures were summarized in a tabular format [\(Table 3\)](#page-3-0).

# **Results**

<span id="page-2-32"></span>After title and abstract screening, followed by full-text retrieval, 62 studies were included in this review and are summarized in [Table](#page-3-0) [3](#page-3-0). [4–](#page-17-3)[6,](#page-17-4)[18–](#page-18-0)[76](#page-19-0) The studies spanned Europe, North America, South America, Asia, and the Asia Pacific Region. The employment categories were diverse, but most often included public sector workers such as managers, office workers, administrators, researchers, and teachers. The age of workers varied, but most often covered middle-aged working adults. The search and screening process at each stage based on the key inclusion and exclusion criteria is summarized with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) f lowchart in [Figure 1](#page-13-0).

# <span id="page-2-33"></span>**Remote work and well-being** *Effects of remote work on well-being and stress*

The impact of remote work on well-being, stress, and mental health varied across the studies.[19](#page-18-1),[21,](#page-18-11)[30](#page-18-12),[31](#page-18-13),[33,](#page-18-14)[44](#page-18-15),[45,](#page-18-16)[55,](#page-19-1)[64](#page-19-2),[72,](#page-19-3)[73](#page-19-4),[76](#page-19-0)

<span id="page-2-12"></span><span id="page-2-11"></span><span id="page-2-10"></span><span id="page-2-9"></span><span id="page-2-8"></span><span id="page-2-7"></span><span id="page-2-6"></span><span id="page-2-4"></span><span id="page-2-3"></span><span id="page-2-2"></span>Whereas some studies reported benefits of working from home on well-being, others found that well-being declined. For example, a study in Australia found that mental health was negatively affected in 40% of remote workers.[30](#page-18-12) Similar findings were reported in Europe, including in studies in Spain[33](#page-18-14) and in Poland[.44](#page-18-15) A study of university staff found reduced overall well-being and increased stress[73](#page-19-4) in the United Kingdom. Higher levels of tele pressure from working online were associated with emotional exhaustion in employees[.45](#page-18-16) Likewise, studies in Japan found a high 30-day prevalence of stress in teleworkers of 87%[,55](#page-19-1) and increases in stress by 47%, when cross-sectionally evaluating perceived changes in stress during the pandemic[.76](#page-19-0) Nevertheless, some studies also found that working from home was associated with improved overall well-being[.19](#page-18-1),[21](#page-18-11),[64,](#page-19-2)[72](#page-19-3) For instance, 1 study in Japan found that remote work reduced overall stress in employees and promoted mental well-being,[64](#page-19-2) which contrasts with the aforementioned studies in Japan. Similarly, research in Austria found that employees were twice as likely to report improved quality of life relative to their non–remote-working counterparts.[72](#page-19-3) Studies in professors found that many enjoyed working from home, across different countries.[19](#page-18-1),[21](#page-18-11) Specifically, a study in academics found that 66% of them supported future remote work for their well-being[.19](#page-18-1) Thus, working from home was not uniformly associated with poorer well-being and varied according to other contextual factors including employment type.

# *Social isolation as a barrier to remote workplace well-being*

<span id="page-2-34"></span><span id="page-2-31"></span><span id="page-2-30"></span><span id="page-2-29"></span><span id="page-2-28"></span><span id="page-2-27"></span><span id="page-2-26"></span><span id="page-2-25"></span><span id="page-2-24"></span><span id="page-2-23"></span><span id="page-2-22"></span><span id="page-2-21"></span><span id="page-2-20"></span><span id="page-2-19"></span><span id="page-2-18"></span><span id="page-2-17"></span><span id="page-2-16"></span><span id="page-2-15"></span><span id="page-2-14"></span><span id="page-2-5"></span>Working from home during the pandemic was associated with isolation and loneliness, which were found to inf luence wellbeing and stress during remote work. Several studies found that social isolation played a role in employee well-being or mental health when working from home[.22,](#page-18-3)[36](#page-18-17),[44](#page-18-15),[47,](#page-18-18)[53](#page-19-5),[59,](#page-19-6)[61](#page-19-7),[68](#page-19-8),[69,](#page-19-9)[71](#page-19-10),[73,](#page-19-4)[74,](#page-19-11)[78](#page-20-1) For instance, to demonstrate relative differences between remote

<span id="page-3-0"></span>

| Study characteristics. |  |
|------------------------|--|
|                        |  |
| Table 3.               |  |

| Study                     | Design                                                                           | Location              | Gender                                                                                                        | Age                                                | Employment type                                                           | Measures                                                                                                                                           | Outcomes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|---------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Aczel et al<br>(2021)19   | Cross-sectional,<br>= 751<br>repeat<br>n                                         | N/A                   | F = 50.5%<br>M = 48%                                                                                          | N/A                                                | Researchers                                                               | Surveys on efficiency of research work,<br>ideal time spent working from home<br>Feasibility of working from home<br>Productivity                  | Future desire to work from home<br>Similarly efficient n = 41%<br>More efficient n = 29%<br>Less efficient n = 29%<br>= 66%<br>n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Afonson et al<br>(2021)20 | Cross-sectional<br>= 143<br>n                                                    | Portugal              | M = 56%<br>F = 44%                                                                                            | (SD = 8.8)<br>Mean 49                              | From office workers to medical<br>professionals<br>Variable               | Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale<br>Productivity (self-report Likert Scale)<br>Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index<br>Perceived job satisfaction + | Job satisfaction moderately associated<br>quality and job satisfaction b = −0.17<br>Negative relationship between sleep<br>Anxiety and depression n = 29%<br>Productivity: men b = −0.92<br>with productivity b = 0.36<br>Poor sleep n = 74%<br>Men b = −0.54<br>+                                                                                                                     |
| Awada et al<br>(2021)23   | Cross-sectional<br>Qualtrics panel<br>April to June<br>Repeat from<br>= 998<br>n | USA                   | 11% did not<br>disclose<br>M = 32%<br>F = 56%                                                                 | Mean 40.9<br>(SD = 13)                             | Business and office = 29%<br>Engineering 25%<br>Education 22%<br>Variable | Perceived productivity and time spent<br>working at a desk station compared<br>with pre-pandemic times<br>(Likert scale surveys)                   | Mean increase in work time at a work<br>Communication with co-workers and<br>specific work station, desk, chair, and<br>Productivity higher in workers with 1<br>no distractions when compared with<br>Higher mean productivity scores in<br>productivity R = 0.46 (P value <.01)<br>women (2.94) vs 2.78 in men<br>counterparts (P value <.05)<br>station =1.5 h/d<br>(P value = .05) |
| Barone et al<br>(2021)24  | Cross-sectional<br>longitudinal<br>repeat                                        | = 112<br>USA<br>n     | M = 31%<br>F = 69%                                                                                            | Mean = 45.2<br>(SD = 12.3)                         | Managerial = 64%<br>Desk workers<br>Admin. = 25%<br>Sales = 5%            | Sleep (global sleep quality)<br>Emotional well-being<br>Sedentary behavior<br>Job satisfaction<br>Work health<br>Productivity                      | Satisfaction with supervisor = −07 (2.6)<br>Sleep quality improved by 0.7 points<br>No significant changes in sedentary<br>Productivity scale reduction of −0.4<br>Well-being reduction −6.9 points<br>and job satisfaction = −0.6 (1.0)<br>points (SD = 1.2) (P value <.01)<br>(SD = 16) (P value <.01)<br>(P values <.05)<br>(P value <.05)<br>behavior                              |
| Beno et al<br>(2021)27    | Cross-sectional                                                                  | Austria<br>= 154<br>n | e-workers<br>e-workers<br>workers<br>workers<br>M = 44%<br>M = 13%<br>Cubicle<br>Cubicle<br>F = 33%<br>F = 9% | Range 20-29 =<br>30-44 = 38%<br>45-59 = 24%<br>16% | Cubicle and e-workers                                                     | General working-from-home questions<br>on productivity                                                                                             | Desire to work from home always in the<br>Main barriers to productivity: caring for<br>routine not productive (26%), less work<br>children during work (28%), general<br>Sometimes = 27%<br>future = 22%<br>15% = never<br>Often = 35%<br>to do (21%)                                                                                                                                  |

<span id="page-4-3"></span><span id="page-4-2"></span><span id="page-4-1"></span><span id="page-4-0"></span>(Continued)

| Continued<br>Table 3.      |                                                     |                              |                        |                            |                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------|----------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Study                      | Design                                              | Location                     | Gender                 | Age                        | Employment type                                                                                   | Measures                                                                                                                                                                   | Outcomes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Bulinska et al<br>(2021)28 | Cross-sectional                                     | Poland<br>= 220<br>n         | M = 77.3%              | N/A                        | Specialists 62%<br>Managers 15%<br>Directors 10%<br>IT employees                                  | Job satisfaction                                                                                                                                                           | Significant positive association between<br>employee relations and job satisfaction<br>Mediated by trust in co-workers<br>B = 0.367 (F = 27.1; P value <.01)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Davidsen et al<br>(2021)32 | Survey from April<br>Cross-sectional<br>to May 2020 | Faroe Islands<br>= 1328<br>n | M = 23%<br>F = 77%     | Range = 19-71<br>Mean = 34 | Teaching, health services,<br>child care, social work<br>19% private sector<br>Public sector(75%) | Warwick Edinburgh Mental Wellbeing<br>(COVID-19 surveys on these domains)<br>Scale (WEMWBS)<br>Work-family life<br>Job satisfaction                                        | Workers with children had higher stress<br>Restrictions impact family life F = 44.5%<br>were 24% more likely to have a higher<br>and lower perceptions related to their<br>work abilities than their counterparts<br>Those who reported job satisfaction<br>well-being score >44 than their<br>Challenges with working from<br>Mean WEMWBS score = 50.7<br>Social life F = 70% vs 16% M<br>counterparts (P value <.05)<br>Work F = 70% vs 15% M<br>home = 37.2%<br>(P value <.05)<br>vs 30% M |
| Galanti et al<br>(2021)36  | Cross-sectional                                     | = 209<br>Italy<br>n          | M = 71.3%<br>F = 28.7% | Mean = 49.8<br>(SD = 9.4)  | N/A                                                                                               | Perceived work from home productivity<br>Utrecht Work Engagement Scale<br>Five-point Likert scales applied<br>Perceived social isolation<br>Job autonomy<br>Self-isolation | self-leadership and productivity, β = 0.17<br>Negative relationship between isolation<br>and remote work productivity, β = −0.29<br>work-family conf lict and isolation with<br>work-family conf lict and productivity,<br>stress (β = 0.31; 0.48) (P values <.01)<br>Negative relationship between<br>Positive relationship between<br>Positive relationship with<br>= −0.29 (P value <.01)<br>(P value <.01)<br>(P value <.01)<br>β                                                         |
| Garo Albarca<br>et al37    | Cross-sectional                                     | Costa Rica<br>= 317<br>n     | M = 81%<br>F = 19%     | 65% ages<br>18-29          | Software developers                                                                               | General survey on work                                                                                                                                                     | predictors of the success of virtual<br>Trust and communication are<br>teams                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| George et al<br>(2021)38   | Cross-sectional                                     | = 278<br>USA<br>n            | M = 55%<br>F = 45%     | Range 22-74<br>Mean = 39   | N/A                                                                                               | General interviews on remote work                                                                                                                                          | More freedom during remote work = 70%<br>27% did not find that their productivity<br>home = 61% (positive experience)<br>Prefer to continue working from<br>Increase in job demands = 44%<br>increased                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Hallman et al<br>(2021)41  | Cross-sectional<br>From wave of a<br>cohort study   | Sweden<br>= 37<br>n          | 18.5% M<br>81.5% F     | Mean = 43.4<br>(SD = 9.9)  | Office workers                                                                                    | Using a self-report diary<br>Work time/leisure<br>Sleep                                                                                                                    | Mean increase in sleep = 34 min/d<br>Loss of work hours =26 min/d<br>+R2 = 0.33 communication<br>R2 = 0.74 trust                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

<span id="page-5-1"></span><span id="page-5-0"></span>

| Continued<br>Table 3.       |                                               |                                                                                                            |                        |                                                             |                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Study                       | Design                                        | Location                                                                                                   | Gender                 | Age                                                         | Employment type                                                                                                                                         | Measures                                                                                                                                               | Outcomes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Hashim et al<br>(2020)42    | Cross-sectional                               | Malaysia<br>n = 503                                                                                        | M = 58.8%<br>F = 41.2% | (53.7%); 40-49<br>range = 26%<br>30-39 range<br>Majority in | Administrative university<br>staff                                                                                                                      | satisfaction, working conditions, and<br>Online Likert surveys on job<br>productivity                                                                  | Work productivity/performance = 53% at<br>Job satisfaction with remote work = 87%<br>35.6% did not have availability of work<br>17.7% did not complete logbooks<br>35.4% did not have ICT support<br>space at home<br>home                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Holgerson et al<br>(2021)43 | Cross-sectional                               | Norway                                                                                                     | N/A                    | N/A                                                         | Wide range of jobs                                                                                                                                      | Survey on job tasks during remote<br>work                                                                                                              | 38% of jobs may be performed remotely<br>Most work-from-home friendly jobs:<br>Professional = 57.4%<br>Technical = 42.7%<br>Agriculture = 17%<br>Managerial =65%<br>Mechanical = 7%<br>Clerical = 63%<br>Sales = 26.7%<br>Trades =12%<br>at home                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Ipsen et al<br>(2021)6      | Cross-sectional<br>May 2020<br>March to       | Denmark = 23.3%<br>Germany 23.1%<br>29 European<br>Italy 15.3%<br>countries<br>N = 5748<br>Sweden<br>14.5% | M = 40.8%<br>F = 59.2% | 18 to <60 years<br>years of age                             | Managerial = 23%<br>Teaching = 17.9%<br>Research 20.7%<br>Admin = 38.4%<br>Wide range<br>Sales 5.7%                                                     | Survey on working from home<br>experiences                                                                                                             | fewer office adaptability issues (Cohen's<br>Cut-off for advantage and disadvantage<br>Gender differences: Men adapted better<br>to working from home (Cohen's d = 0.9;<br>Good experiences with working from<br>value <.01) than women and had<br>for remote work mean score >3.5<br>(3) uncertainty around work<br>(1) home office issues<br>= 0.76; P value <.01)<br>(3) control over work<br>(1) work life balance<br>(2) insufficient tools<br>(2) work efficiency<br>Disadvantages:<br>Advantages:<br>home = 55%<br>P<br>d |
| Krug et al<br>(2021)47      | Cross-sectional<br>to May 2, 2020<br>April 11 | Germany<br>= 363<br>n                                                                                      | M = 32%<br>F = 68%     | Mean = 36.3<br>(SD = 11.0)                                  | Health and social work = 15.2%<br>Education and science = 16.8%<br>Public service = 15.4%<br>Manufacturing and<br>Automotive = 6.6%<br>engineering =11% | Job satisfaction Kunin Item Scale<br>Social identity with the Exeter<br>Identity Leadership Inventory<br>Workplace Loneliness Scale<br>identity scales | leadership and job satisfaction, B = 041<br>Negative association between identity<br>Positive association between identity<br>leadership and loneliness at work,<br>B= −0.17 (P value <.05)<br>(P value <.01)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

| (Continued) |
|-------------|
|             |

| Study                                   | Design                           | Location                  | Gender                 | Age                                                      | Employment type                              | Measures                                                                                                                                                                                            | Outcomes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|-----------------------------------------|----------------------------------|---------------------------|------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Kruckl et al<br>(2021)46                | Cross-sectional                  | Switzerland<br>= 200<br>n | N/A                    | N/A                                                      | Health professionals<br>Psychiatric hospital | Depression PHQ-2<br>Anxiety GAD-2<br>Stress PHQD                                                                                                                                                    | Adaptability of a home office varied by<br>Minor stress reported, mean = 2.83 on<br>73% found that Zoom was good for<br>groups and can be implemented in<br>No sign of depression or anxiety<br>Inadequate IT support = 48%<br>psychiatric hospitals<br>web-based therapy<br>scale (SD = 2.92)                           |
| Lizana et al<br>(2021)5                 | Cross-sectional                  | = 336<br>Chile<br>n       | M = 21%<br>F = 79%     | Mean = 37.5<br>(SD = 10.75)                              | Teachers                                     | Work hours and work-life balance<br>Quality of Life QoL (SPF-36)                                                                                                                                    | Teachers working longer hours were 2<br>Work-life balance interruption = 86%<br>times as likely to report poorer MH<br>Rise in work hours = 78%<br>outcomes                                                                                                                                                              |
| Lonska et al<br>(2021)49                | Cross-sectional<br>Sept-Oct 2020 | Latvia                    | M = 20.3%<br>F = 79.7% | 35-44 = 29.6%<br>25-34 = 20.2%<br>45-54 = 26.8%<br>Range | N/A                                          | Work-life balance survey                                                                                                                                                                            | Women more likely to report increase in<br>household workload, mean = 3.60 vs 3.3<br>Those with children mean household<br>in men (unchanged) (P values <.05)<br>Women and those with children<br>chores score = 3.69 vs 3.29<br>affected                                                                                |
| Magnavita et al<br>(2021)50             | Cross-sectional                  | = 910<br>Italy<br>n       | 36.6% = M<br>40.4% = F | Mean = 45.9<br>(SD = 11.3)                               | Trade and service sector<br>workers          | Stress: Siegrist Effort Reward Balance<br>Intrusive leadership-toxic leadership<br>Mental health: Goldberg Depression<br>Workaholism: Bergman Work<br>and Anxiety Scale<br>Addiction Scale<br>scale | increased work hours/workaholism,<br>Intrusive leadership associated with<br>Workaholism moderates the<br>stress, B = 0.26 (P value <.01)<br>B = 0.44 (P value <.01)<br>relationship<br>+                                                                                                                                |
| McDowell et al<br>(2021)51              | Cross-sectional                  | = 2309<br>USA<br>n        | M = 34%<br>F = 66%     | Range 18-74                                              | N/A                                          | Short Warwick Edinburgh Wellbeing<br>Mental health: Beck Depression and<br>Loneliness Scale<br>Anxiety Scale<br>Scale                                                                               | between remote vs non–remote workers<br>No significant differences in loneliness<br>No statistically significant changes in<br>mental health in remote workers                                                                                                                                                           |
| Miyake et al<br>(preprint)53<br>(2021)∗ | Cross-sectional                  | = 4052<br>Japan<br>n      | M = 58%<br>F = 42%     | 20-39 = 20%<br>40-49 = 28%<br>50-65 = 52%<br>Range       | Desk workers                                 | Loneliness and job stress (job content)<br>questionnaires                                                                                                                                           | (adjusted) = 1.60 ( P value <.05; 95% CI<br>co-workers = 46% + supervisors = 49%<br>(adjusted) = 4.06 (95% CI exclude 1; P<br>Low co-worker support vs high OR<br>Low supervisor support OR = 2.49<br>(95% CIs exclude 1; P value <.01)<br>Remote work and loneliness OR<br>Job stress from<br>value <.01)<br>exclude 1) |
|                                         |                                  |                           |                        |                                                          |                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

<span id="page-6-4"></span><span id="page-6-3"></span><span id="page-6-2"></span><span id="page-6-1"></span><span id="page-6-0"></span>**Table 3.** Continued

<span id="page-7-3"></span><span id="page-7-2"></span><span id="page-7-1"></span><span id="page-7-0"></span>**Table 3.** Continued

| (Continued) |  |
|-------------|--|
|             |  |
|             |  |
|             |  |
|             |  |
|             |  |
|             |  |
|             |  |
|             |  |
|             |  |
|             |  |
|             |  |
|             |  |
|             |  |
|             |  |
|             |  |
|             |  |

| Study                            | Design                               | Location                     | Gender                 | Age                        | Employment type                                                                                                                                                        | Measures                                                                                              | Outcomes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|----------------------------------|--------------------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------|----------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Moretti et al<br>(2020)54        | Cross-sectional                      | = 50<br>Italy<br>n           | M = 43.1%<br>F = 56.9% | Mean = 46.6<br>(SD = 11.2) | Mobile workers                                                                                                                                                         | Fear Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire<br>Utrecht Work Engagement Scale<br>Brief Pain Inventory         | Satisfaction comparable to former<br>Productivity declined by 30%<br>Neck pain intensified = 50%<br>working conditions = 51%<br>Stress reduced by 39%                                                                                                                                   |
| Sandoval Reyes<br>et al (2021)58 | Cross-sectional<br>April-May, 2020   | Latin America<br>= 1285<br>n | M = 34.1%<br>F = 69.5% | N/A                        | Service sector = 18%<br>Education = 44%                                                                                                                                | Quantitative Workload Inventory<br>Folkman & Lazarus Work Stress<br>Job satisfaction<br>Questionnaire | Productivity positively related to remote<br>negative relationship with work-life<br>Remote work significant predictor of<br>work satisfaction B = −0.190<br>stress: B = 0.269 (P value <.01)<br>work, B = 0.120 (P value <.01)<br>B= −0.225 (P value <.01)<br>(P value <.01)<br>+<br>+ |
| Savolainen et al<br>(2021)59     | Longitudinal                         | Finland<br>= 1308<br>n       | M = 54.8%<br>F = 45.2% | (SD = 11.4)<br>Mean 45     | Variable                                                                                                                                                               | Spielberger State Trait Anxiety Scale<br>Loneliness Scale                                             | associated with poorer MH outcomes<br><.01) + stress (B = 0.74; P value <.01);<br><.01) + loneliness (B = 1.21; P value<br>Technostress (B = 0.24; P value<br>(anxiety)                                                                                                                 |
| Senturk et al<br>(2021)61        | Cross-sectional                      | Turkey<br>= 459<br>n         | M = 55.3%<br>F = 44.7% | Mean = 35.6<br>(SD = 6.84) | Sales and marketing = 16.1%<br>Software developers = 21.8%<br>Bank employees = 14.6%<br>Public office = 6.3%<br>Engineers = 5.2%<br>industry = 17.2%<br>Pharmaceutical | Depression, Anxiety, and Stress Scale<br>Jenkins Sleep Scale                                          | (P value <.01) + loneliness (B = −0.095;<br>Significant differences between men<br>Female predictor of stress B= 0.155<br>Increased workload/hours/chores<br>(P values <.05)<br>Stress = 19.6%<br>value <.05)<br>and women<br>P                                                         |
| Shimura et al<br>(2021)64        | Longitudinal<br>2019-2020<br>changes | = 3123<br>Japan<br>n         | M = 56.7%<br>F = 43.3% | Mean = 37.3<br>(SD = 10.9) | Tertiary industry<br>Office workers                                                                                                                                    | Work Limitations Questionnaire<br>Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index<br>Brief Job Stress Questionnaire    | who worked remotely 5 d/wk were 1.42<br>(presenteeism reduced) (P value <.05)<br>Decrease in work productivity: those<br>period prior to remote work (F = 5.42;<br>times as likely to be less productive<br>Decrease in stress compared with<br>value <.01)<br>P                        |
| Spagnoli et al<br>(2020)66       | Cross-sectional                      | = 339<br>Italy<br>n          | M = 46.6%<br>F = 53.4% |                            | Mean = 48.4(SD = 9.7) University employees                                                                                                                             | Dutch Work Addiction Scale<br>Technostress Creator Scale<br>Toxic Leadership Scale                    | Significant differences in technostress<br>(women higher) (F = 4.5; P value <.05)<br>workaholism vs low authoritarian<br>associated with technostress and<br>scores between men and women<br>High authoritarian leadership<br>leadership                                                |
| Staniscuaski<br>et al (2021)67   | Cross-sectional                      | = 3345<br>Brazil<br>n        | M = 31.6%<br>F = 68.4% | N/A                        | Academics                                                                                                                                                              | Survey on work                                                                                        | X = 21.7 (P value <.01) (women less likely)<br>Productivity negatively affected = 69%<br>Significant differences between men<br>And parents, X = 55.3 (P value <.01)<br>and women in meeting deadlines,<br>Men without kids met deadlines<br>compared with nonparents                   |

<span id="page-8-0"></span>

| (Continued) |
|-------------|
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |

| Table 3.                                   | Continued                           |                                                    |                                                  |                                       |                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|--------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Study                                      | Design                              | Location                                           | Gender                                           | Age                                   | Employment type                                                                                                            | Measures                                                                                                                              | Outcomes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Toscano et al<br>(2020)68                  | Cross-sectional                     | = 265<br>Italy<br>n                                | M = 38%<br>F = 62%                               | 35-36 = 42.3%<br>36-45 = 21%<br>Range | 40% = public tertiary<br>Private sector = 59%<br>organizations                                                             | General online health and work survey<br>Social isolation (Golden Scale)<br>Remote Job Satisfaction<br>Stress Scale                   | Both stress (B = −0.17) and social isolation<br>(p-values <0.01). In addition to this, both<br>Work satisfaction and isolation negative<br>stress and isolation have a significant<br>(B = −0.38) have a significant negative<br>positive relationship B = 0.59 p-value<br>relationship, B = −0.18 (P value <.01)<br>relationship with job productivity<br><0.01 |
| Tusl et al<br>(2021)69                     | Cross-sectional                     | Germany and<br>Switzerland<br>= 2118<br>n          | M = 55%<br>F = 45%                               | Mean = 46.5<br>(SD = 11.28)           | Variable                                                                                                                   | Warwick Edinburgh Mental Wellbeing<br>General work questionnaire<br>Scale                                                             | Those who worked from home OR = 2.77<br>Lower well-being OR = 0.61 in workers<br>for improved work life vs nonremote<br>who had their work life impacted by<br>Work time unchanged 51%<br>Work-life worsened = 30%<br>COVID vs counterparts<br>Increased in 38%<br>Improved = 10%                                                                                |
| Cornelis et al<br>Vander Feltz<br>(2020)71 | Cross-sectional                     | = 1055<br>UK<br>n                                  | = 45.29SD = 30)<br>Mean                          | M = 26%<br>F = 73%                    | University employees                                                                                                       | Presenteeism + Absenteeism-iPCQ<br>Perceived Stress Questionnaire<br>Mental health-PHQ-9; GAD-7                                       | OR = 2.23 (95% CIs exclude 1), isolation<br>OR = 1.97 (95% CIs exclude 1); female<br>Vulnerability in staff with children<br>OR = 1.62 (95% CIs exclude 1)<br>COVID stress = 66.2%<br>Resilience in 33.8%                                                                                                                                                        |
| Xiao et al<br>(2021)74                     | Cross-sectional                     | = 988<br>China<br>n                                | Mean = 40.9<br>(SD = 13.1)                       | M = 43.5%<br>F = 56.5%                | Computer science and<br>architecture = 24.6%<br>mathematics = 8.2%<br>Business and office<br>Engineering and<br>work = 29% | occupational and home office<br>General physical and mental<br>General questionnaires on<br>well-being (Likert scale)<br>environments | mental wellbeing, r = 0.27 (P value <.01)<br>Distractions while working negatively<br>positively associated with improved<br>correlated with well-being, r = −0.30<br>Communication with co-workers<br>(P value <.01)                                                                                                                                            |
| Xiong et al<br>(2021)75                    | Content analysis<br>Cross-sectional | = 28 579<br>Twitter<br>Online<br>posts<br>USA<br>n | 30-39 = 37%<br>19-29 = 16%<br>>40 years<br>= 37% | M = 57.9%<br>F = 42.1%                | N/A                                                                                                                        | inference models to extract data on<br>VANDER measured sentiment on<br>participant characteristics<br>Twitter/X posts<br>+            | have +ve attitudes on remote work<br>Women significantly more likely to<br>And higher income earners<br>(P values <.01)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Zhang et al<br>(2021)4 ∗∗                  | Content analysis                    | Twitter/X<br>Internet<br>= 1000<br>tweets<br>n     | N/A                                              | N/A                                   | Variable                                                                                                                   | Analysis of themes                                                                                                                    | cybersecurity, effective leadership and<br>Main themes: work-life balance,<br>teamwork                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|                                            |                                     |                                                    |                                                  |                                       |                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

<span id="page-9-1"></span><span id="page-9-0"></span>

| Table 3. Continued                    | nued            |                                 |                        |                                           |                                                             |                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
|---------------------------------------|-----------------|---------------------------------|------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Study                                 | Design          | Location                        | Gender                 | Age                                       | Employment type                                             | Measures                                                                                 | Outcomes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Almdhawi et al $(2021)^{21}$          | Cross-sectional | Jordan                          | M = 67.9%<br>F = 32.1% | Mean = 46.9<br>(SD = 9.43)                | Professors                                                  | Health Survey SF-12<br>Depression and Anxiety Scale-DASS,<br>Neck Disability Index, IPAQ | Increase in work amount = 65% Stress = 17% Overall, good adjustment to working from home Significant relationship between stress (B = -0.48; P value <.01) and lower quality of life scores Higher quality of life scores in those satisfied with remote work and teaching (B = 2.81, 3.94; P values <.01) Neck Disability Index also negatively related to HRQQL (B = -0.56; P value <.01) |
| Barriga et al<br>(2021) <sup>25</sup> | Cross-sectional | Ecuador $n = 1044$              | M = 45%<br>F = 55%     | Millenni-<br>als=60%                      | 71% = operational positions 28% = supervisors               | Work Family Conflict and Burnout<br>Scales                                               | No significant effect of remote work on work-life balance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Chapman et al                         | Prospective     | Australia $n = 163$             | F = 72% $M = 28%$      | Range<br>25-34=34%                        | Academics $(n = 131)$ /scientists and nonscientists (admin) | General survey on work and health                                                        | Mental health /well-being negatively affected during remote work = 40%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| (2021)                                | conort          | n = 163<br>Academics            | M = 78%                | 25-34 = 34%<br>35-44 = 29%<br>45-54 = 17% | and nonscientists (admin.)                                  |                                                                                          | arrected during remote work = 40% Productivity increased for some groups and tasks: manuscript submissions = increased by 40%. Most often worked in kitchen (42%) and shared home offices (22%) Wore pyjamas during work (46%; scientists) Productivity lower in those with                                                                                                                 |
|                                       |                 |                                 |                        |                                           |                                                             |                                                                                          | children (63% reduction vs 32% without children) (P value <.01)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Castillo et al $(2021)^{33}$          | Cross-sectional | Spain<br>n=462<br>(teleworkers) | M=39%<br>M=61%         | Mean = 44.6                               | Variable                                                    | General health questionnaire                                                             | Remote working associated with lower<br>well-being<br>Women more affected than men                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Estrada Munoz<br>(2021) <sup>34</sup> | Cross-sectional | Chile<br>n = 3006               | F = 71.7%<br>M = 27.4% | N/A                                       | Teachers                                                    | Technostress questionnaire                                                               | Techno anxiety = 11% Techno fatigue = 7.2% Technostress = 6.2%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Gabr et al<br>(2021) <sup>35</sup>    | Cross-sectional | Egypt<br>n=142                  | M = 52.8%<br>F = 47.2% | Mean = 36.3<br>(SD = 6.4)                 | University staff                                            | Technostress questionnaire<br>Blood cortisol                                             | Good Wi-Fi = 78% Technostress higher in teachers without technical support, good Wi-Fi connection, women, not a good home office environment (P values <.01) Significant relationship between blood cortisol and technostress (P value <.01)                                                                                                                                                |

<span id="page-10-4"></span><span id="page-10-3"></span><span id="page-10-2"></span><span id="page-10-1"></span><span id="page-10-0"></span>

| (Continued) |
|-------------|
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |
|             |

| Continued<br>Table 3.       |                 |                        |                            |                            |                                                                                        |                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|-----------------------------|-----------------|------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Study                       | Design          | Location               | Gender                     | Age                        | Employment type                                                                        | Measures                                                                                                                  | Outcomes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Ghisleri et al<br>(2021)39  | Cross-sectional | = 211<br>Italy<br>n    | M = 26%<br>F = 74%         | Mean = 53.2<br>(SD = 6.6)  | Administrative and technical<br>health care staff                                      | Work–family conf lict<br>Demands<br>Cognitive<br>Recovery                                                                 | 1.71 in those without children; P values<br>caring for children (mean score 2.08 vs<br>Higher work–family conf lict in those<br>between ICT stress and work–family<br>Significant positive relationship<br>conf lict (r = 0.26; P value <.01)<br><.05)                              |
| Izdebski et al<br>(2021)44  | Cross-sectional | = 3000<br>Poland<br>n  | M = 50%<br>F = 50%         | (SD = 16.2)<br>Mean = 45   | Variable                                                                               | Level of Mental Symptoms Index<br>(LMHSI)                                                                                 | Remote work negatively associated with<br>scores and loneliness scores between<br>reported higher MH symptom scores<br>Significant differences in well-being<br>mental health + gender (females<br>remote and non–remote workers<br>(62.9 vs 57.6; P value <.05)<br>(P values <.01) |
| Kotera et al<br>(2021)45    | Cross-sectional | = 126<br>UK<br>n       | M = 16%<br>F = 84%         | Mean = 47.4<br>(SD = 14)   | Psychotherapists                                                                       | Work-Life Balance Checklist<br>Maslach Burnout Inventory<br>Telepressure (Likert survey)<br>Self-Compassion Scale         | Telepressure and emotional exhaustion<br>negative relationship (r = −0.29; P value<br>+ve correlated (r = 0.29; P value <.01)<br>Self-compassion and telepressure<br><.01)                                                                                                          |
| Krukowski et al<br>(2021)48 | Cross-sectional | = 284<br>USA<br>n      | Mean = 45.8<br>(SD = 16.3) | M = 33%<br>F = 67%         | Academics                                                                              | General health and work survey                                                                                            | Women submitted fewer manuscripts<br>Work hours reduced in those with<br>children when compared with<br>counterparts (P value <.01)<br>(P value <.05)                                                                                                                               |
| Meyer et al<br>(2021)52     | Longitudinal    | Germany<br>= 2900<br>n | M = 31%<br>F = 69%         | Mean = 41.9<br>(SD = 11.3) | Public admin. = 22.9%<br>Universities = 10.7%<br>Health and social<br>services = 20.5% | Copenhagen Burnout Inventory<br>Perceived social support                                                                  | burnout in women with children without<br>Working from home linked with<br>Women more exhausted than<br>men(b = −0.19; P value <.05)<br>access to daycare                                                                                                                           |
| Niu et al (2021)55          | Cross-sectional | = 5214<br>Japan<br>n   | M = 77%<br>F = 23%         | Mean = 44.2                | Office teleworkers<br>teleworkers                                                      | Kessler Psychological Distress Scale<br>Physical symptoms questionnaire<br>Work–family conf lict scale<br>Telework survey | 50% of remote workers satisfied<br>High stress prevalence 30-day<br>prevalence (13% = no stress)                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Sharma et al<br>(2021)63    | Cross-sectional | = 538<br>India<br>n    | F = 100%                   | Mean = 32.7<br>(SD = 7.8)  | N/A                                                                                    | General questionnaire created on<br>mental health and work                                                                | Increase in household chores = 34%<br>Mental health declined = 27%<br>Neck or back pain = 45%<br>(moderate-severe)                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Schade et al<br>(2021)60    | Cross-sectional | Germany                | M = 44%<br>F = 56%         | N/A                        | N/A                                                                                    | Personal organizational resources<br>Work-related basic needs scale<br>Utrecht Work Engagement<br>Questionnaire           | relatedness to co-workers (P value <.01)<br>Working at home associated with lower<br>Competence associated with<br>productivity                                                                                                                                                     |
|                             |                 |                        |                            |                            |                                                                                        |                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

<span id="page-11-0"></span>

| Continued<br>Table 3.       |                                              |                        |                                             |                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|-----------------------------|----------------------------------------------|------------------------|---------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Study                       | Design                                       | Location               | Gender                                      | Age                                                                                                                                    | Employment type                                                                       | Measures                                                                                                                                                                           | Outcomes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Seva et al<br>(2021)62      | Cross-sectional                              | Philippines<br>n = 352 | M = 38%<br>F = 62%                          | Median = 35.2                                                                                                                          | Nonmanagerial = 51%<br>Public admin. = 11.3%<br>Education = 37%<br>IT = 9%            | Copenhagen stress questionnaire<br>Nordic musculoskeletal<br>questionnaire<br>subscale                                                                                             | suitability of workstation (B = −0.24) and<br>musculoskeletal strain (P values <.05)<br>Negative relationship between stress<br>ergonomic suitability (B = −0.18) and<br>Negative relationship between<br>and productivity (B = −0.13;<br>P value <.05)                                                        |
| Weitzer et al<br>(2021)72   | Cross-sectional                              | Austria<br>n = 686     | M = 45%<br>F = 55%                          | 30-39 = 16.8%<br>40-49 = 26.7%<br><30 = 19.6%<br>50-59 = 24%<br>Range                                                                  | Variable                                                                              | General survey on lifestyle, quality<br>of life, productivity                                                                                                                      | relative to non–remote workers (95% CI:<br>non–remote workers (95% CI include 1)<br>Remote workers 2.07 times more likely<br>Less productive when working from<br>Lower quality of life in mothers of<br>to report improved quality of life<br>home, OR = 1.48 compared with<br>younger children<br>1.09-3.91) |
| Wood et al<br>(2021)73      | 4-week diaries<br>Longitudinal<br>Repeat two | = 784<br>UK<br>n       | F = 74% first<br>77% second<br>wave<br>wave | mean age 43.69<br>Mean age 44.56<br>Under 30 = 10%<br>50 = 30-33%<br>SD = 11.36<br>SD = 11.10<br>waves-2<br>Phase 2<br>Phase 1<br>Over | University staff                                                                      | Mental well-being: Warwick<br>Work to nonwork conf lict<br>Anxiety, contentment<br>Edinburgh scale<br>ICT constraints<br>Social support<br>Job demands<br>Well-being<br>Loneliness | Isolation/loneliness increased<br>Well-being declined                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Yoshimoto et al<br>(2021)76 | Cross-sectional                              | = 1941<br>Japan<br>n   | M = 70.5%<br>F = 29.5                       | Median = 43                                                                                                                            | Variable                                                                              | General pain, working style, stress<br>questionnaires                                                                                                                              | OR for pain from stress = 2.216 (95% CI<br>OR telework = 2.27 (95% CI exclude 1)<br>Stress increased = 47%<br>Pain increased = 15%<br>exclude 1)<br>for pain                                                                                                                                                   |
| Andel et al<br>(2021)22     | 8-week diary<br>Longitudinal                 | = 265<br>USA<br>n      | M = 55.5%<br>F = 44.5%                      | Mean = 40.8<br>(SD = 4.6)                                                                                                              | Manufacturing = 11.3%<br>Professionals = 20.4%<br>Technical = 18.9%<br>Retail = 12.8% | Telecommuting behavior<br>Self-compassion<br>Depression                                                                                                                            | Telecommuting frequency associated<br>with work loneliness (r = 0.12, y = 0.42;<br>depression (y = −0.13) (P values <.05)<br>For work loneliness (y = −0.6) and<br>Mindfulness moderated this<br>value <.01)<br>relationship<br>P                                                                              |
| Bennett et al<br>(2021)26   | Cross-sectional                              | = 55<br>USA<br>n       | M = 58%<br>F = 42%                          | Mean = 33.6<br>(SD = 9.0)                                                                                                              | finance, health care, education,<br>Legal services, banking,<br>IT                    | With a general health survey on<br>Qualitative thematic analysis<br>working from home                                                                                              | group belongingess and Zoom fatigue<br>Negative relationship between work<br>(y = −0.21; P value <.01)                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

<span id="page-12-3"></span><span id="page-12-2"></span><span id="page-12-1"></span><span id="page-12-0"></span>

| Continued |
|-----------|
|           |
|           |
|           |
|           |
|           |
|           |
| Table 3.  |
|           |
|           |
|           |
|           |
|           |

| Study                      | Design                               | Location                         | Gender                 | Age                                                   | Employment type                                                                                            | Measures                                                                                                           | Outcomes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|----------------------------|--------------------------------------|----------------------------------|------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Chan et al<br>(2021)29     | Cross-sectional                      | 151 elementary<br>schools<br>USA | M = 19%<br>F = 81%     | N/A                                                   | Teachers                                                                                                   | Emotional exhaustion: Maslach<br>Teaching efficacy and school<br>Burnout Inventory<br>connectedness<br>Job demands | linked with job satisfaction (r = −0.72; P<br>autonomy<br>Belonging (school connectedness<br>Satisfied with job less than<br>+<br>(r = −0.27; P value <.05)<br>sometimes = 23%<br>value <.01)                                                                                                                                                       |
| Conroy et al<br>(2021)31   | Cross-sectional                      | = 834<br>USA<br>n                | F = 78.7%              | (SD = 12.9)<br>Mean = 43                              | Psychologists =21%<br>Physicians = 18%<br>Nurses = 10%                                                     | General health survey                                                                                              | Significant differences between remote<br>and non–remote workers (P value <.01)<br>Went to bed later = 64%<br>Mood worsened = 57%<br>Woke up later = 74%                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Guler et al<br>(2021)40    | Cross-sectional                      | = 194<br>USA<br>n                | M = 51%<br>F = 49%     | Mean = 33.9<br>(SD = 7.6)                             | Software specialists = 9.3%<br>Academics = 11.9%<br>Engineers = 35.6%<br>Analysts =12.4%<br>Bankers = 6.2% | Nordic Musculoskeletal Questionnaire<br>General questionnaire on work and<br>health                                | Productivity increased (1-3 h = 28%) and<br>Chair comfort = uncomfortable 12.4%<br>Shared working room = 12% always,<br>Reduced working hours = 15%<br>back pain (P value <.01)<br>Unsure 22%<br>often 18%                                                                                                                                          |
| Okawara et al<br>(2021)56  | Cross-sectional                      | = 5760<br>Japan<br>n             | M = 58%<br>F = 42%     | Range 20-65                                           | Office and non–office workers                                                                              | Work Functioning Impairment Scale                                                                                  | likely to have work impairment OR = 2.02<br>Participants who did not have adequate<br>lighting in their home offices more<br>(95% CI exclude 1)                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Shockley et al<br>(2021)65 | 7 weeks follow-up<br>Longitudinal    | = 334 couples<br>USA<br>n        | N/A                    | Mean F = 34.8<br>(SD = 5.7)<br>(SD = 6.6)<br>M = 36.3 | N/A                                                                                                        | General questionnaires on health,<br>family, work performance                                                      | Most of the housework undertaken by<br>scores when they did all of the family<br>Women had the lowest well-being<br>work while working remotely<br>women = 36.6%                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Abdel et al<br>(2021)18    | Prospective<br>7-day diary<br>cohort | Germany<br>= 178<br>n            | N/A                    | N/A                                                   | Variable                                                                                                   | General questionnaires on job and<br>home demands, leisure, and work<br>performance                                | value <.01) with emotional exhaustion<br>performance and emotional exhaustion<br>with exhaustion (B = 0.46; P value <.01)<br>Home demands positive relationship<br>exhaustion (B = −0.11; P value <.01)<br>Leisure negative relationship with<br>Negative relationship between job<br>and work demands (B = 0.11;<br>(B = −0.12; P value <.01)<br>P |
| Usman et al<br>(2021)55    | Two-wave time<br>Cohort<br>lagged    | Pakistan<br>= 236<br>n           | M = 26.3%<br>F = 73.7% | <25 = 24.2%<br>>33 = 16.9%<br>25-33 = 58%             | Health care                                                                                                | Participative Leadership Scale<br>Work thriving                                                                    | Participative leadership associated with<br>work thriving (B = 0.57; P value <.01)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Salazar et al57            | Cross-sectional                      | = 677<br>Spain<br>n              | M = 50%<br>F = 50%     | Mean = 48.7<br>(SD = 10.5)                            | University workers                                                                                         | Brief Illness Perception Questionnaire<br>Depression and anxiety DASS-21<br>Coping strategies Cope-28              | (rho = −0.115), and stress (rho = −0.108)<br>Social support inversely related to<br>depression (rho = −0.169), anxiety                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

DASS, ; F, ; GAD-2, ; HRQOL, ; ICT, ; IPAW, ; iPCQ, ; IT, ; M, ; MH, ; N/A, ; OR, odds ratio; PHQ-2, ; PHQD, ; SPF-36, VANDER, WEMWBS.

<span id="page-13-0"></span>**Figure 1.** Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) f low diagram of the search.

and non–remote workers, a study in university employees who reported that they were isolated were 78% more likely to be vulnerable to poor well-being and higher stress when compared with their counterparts who did not feel isolated[.71](#page-19-10) Approximately onequarter of university staff experienced depression or anxiety[.71](#page-19-10) In contrast, a large cross-sectional study in the United States during early lockdown in April 2020 did not find that working from home was associated with higher levels of loneliness[.51](#page-19-14) Technostress was identified as a predictor of poor mental health outcomes in workers in Finland[.59](#page-19-6) Nonetheless, the trends point towards vulnerability to feelings of isolation and loneliness when working from home, which inf luence remote workplace well-being, stress, and mental health.

## *Employee social support as a buffer for remote workplace well-being*

<span id="page-13-3"></span><span id="page-13-2"></span><span id="page-13-1"></span>Co-workers and employers play a role in providing employees with social support to buffer against the negative effects of isolation and loneliness when working from home and to promote well-being.[26](#page-18-7),[47,](#page-18-18)[53](#page-19-5),[57](#page-19-27),[69,](#page-19-9)[79](#page-20-2),[80](#page-20-3) Regular social support was found to be integral for well-being,[81](#page-20-4) mitigating the effects of loneliness and isolation associated with remote work. Social connectivity was identified as a main factor for buffering against stress in 1 study in Austria[,79](#page-20-2) whereas a study in Spain found that social support was negatively associated with depression[.57](#page-19-27) Levels of contact with co-workers inf luenced perceptions of loneliness[.53](#page-19-5) A study found that remote workers were 1.6 times more likely to experience feelings of isolation when compared with non–remote workers and that having co-worker support mitigated this.[53](#page-19-5) They also found that remote workers with little support from co-workers were 4 times more likely to report feelings of isolation when compared with those with high levels of support[.53](#page-19-5) Zoom fatigue was found to be inversely related to group belongingness in the workplace[,26](#page-18-7) highlighting the need to promote interconnectedness during telework or online remote work.

Management played a role in fostering social support and reducing feelings of isolation in the workplace. Organizational support, which is support from the organization in which one works, was found to be a significant determinant of remote workplace well-bein[g80](#page-20-3) and fostered a sense of identify and belonging in the workplace.[47](#page-18-18) Workers with low levels of managerial support were 2.5 times more likely to report loneliness when compared with those who reported high levels of support.[53](#page-19-5) Thus, it appears that not only co-worker support, but also managerial support is important for fostering a remote workplace environment that promotes well-being and reduces feelings of loneliness.

In addition to direct support from the workplace and colleagues, having personal support in one's private life was also identified as being important for buffering against the negative effects of working from home. For example, the negative impact of working from home on personal life was mitigated by having a partner when compared with single individuals who were younger[.69](#page-19-9) Therefore, remote workers should ideally have support on a spectrum ranging from colleague and co-worker social support and regular contact, social support from middle management, and peer as well as family social support when working remotely to promote well-being.

#### *Gender differences in remote workplace well-being*

Women reported higher levels of stress and lower levels of wellbeing than men in several studies[.32](#page-18-19),[33,](#page-18-14)[34](#page-18-27),[59](#page-19-6),[61,](#page-19-7)[65](#page-19-26),[71](#page-19-10) One study noted that women's well-being scores were contingent on the amount of housework, with women experiencing lowest levels of well-being when they undertook the majority of housework while they were teleworking[.65](#page-19-26) Similar findings on unequal role play were noted in another study, whereby women took on greater roles in family activities.[75](#page-19-19)

Childcare or having children was also associated with poorer overall mental health or well-being.[32](#page-18-19),[52,](#page-19-21)[59,](#page-19-6)[61](#page-19-7),[71,](#page-19-10)[72](#page-19-3),[74](#page-19-11) For example, women were 1.6 times as likely to be vulnerable to the stressors from COVID, and those with children were 2 times as likely, relative to their male counterparts and those without children[.71](#page-19-10) Interestingly, a study estimated that remote work may lead to inequality as it benefits men and those in the higher income <span id="page-14-1"></span>brackets, and could lead to higher income for these groups[.82](#page-20-5) Another study recommended equitable childcare accessibility for women when working from home[,83](#page-20-6) supporting research indicating that women experience burnout especially when they work remotely and cannot access childcare[.52](#page-19-21) Productivity was also reported to be significantly lower in women in Australia if they had children when compared with those without children (reduction of 63% vs 32%)[.30](#page-18-12) Thus, there is a need to better understand the unique differences between men and women and to offer tailored supportive interventions in order to reduce inequalities.

# **Work-life balance**

In addition to social support, isolation, and the role of organizational support, other challenges associated with remote work life that have been identified include work-life balance and work– family conf lict issues. Work-life balance associated with remote working life was measured using subjective self-report, and the findings were mixed across the studies[.6,](#page-17-4)[32](#page-18-19),[36,](#page-18-17)[39,](#page-18-28)[58](#page-19-16),[69,](#page-19-9)[84](#page-20-7)–[86](#page-20-8) A large study in Germany and Switzerland found that those who worked from home were 2.77 times more likely to report improved worklife balance compared with non–remote workers. The exception was when the lives of employees were directly affected by COVID-19[.69](#page-19-9) Likewise, a large study in Europe found that improved worklife balance was a benefit of working from home[.6](#page-17-4) There was variability between countries, however, when considering remote work-life balance perceptions during the pandemic. For example, a study in the Faroe Islands found that 37% struggled with working from home[.32](#page-18-19) Likewise, a study in Latin America found that remote work during the pandemic reduced work-life balance[.58](#page-19-16)

It appears that work-life balance also varied between different professions. A large study in Europe found that part-time teleworkers had a good work-life balance, but that this balance was compromised in individuals who worked full time and were mobile (needed to move for work)[.84](#page-20-7) A study found that work-life balance was not affected if employees had regular employment, instead of under precarious employment conditions[.85](#page-20-9) Work-life balance also varied across different professions. A study in teachers found that 86% felt that telework caused difficulties with maintaining work-life balance, primarily due to increased work hours.[5](#page-17-16) Increased work hours in tandem with work-life imbalance were predictors of poor quality of life on the mental health part of the survey[.5](#page-17-16) Higher workloads and monitoring of work from home led to greater conf licts in the home-work sphere.[86](#page-20-8) Higher levels of stress and isolation were also negatively associated with worklife balance.[36](#page-18-17),[39](#page-18-28) Thus, ways to reduce excessive work hours and stress are needed and stress coping skills may also be useful to improve work-life balance in remote work.

#### **Productivity and work time**

<span id="page-14-5"></span>Productivity varied across studies and was measured mostly through self-report[,6,](#page-17-4)[18](#page-18-0),[20,](#page-18-2)[23,](#page-18-4)[24](#page-18-5),[27,](#page-18-8)[36](#page-18-17),[37](#page-18-20),[42,](#page-18-23)[54](#page-19-15),[64,](#page-19-2)[67,](#page-19-18)[68](#page-19-8),[72](#page-19-3) which may limit conclusions to be drawn from these results as such selfreports are open to bias.[87](#page-20-10) Whereas some studies found increases in productivity during remote work,[6](#page-17-4) others found reductions in productivity[.54,](#page-19-15)[64](#page-19-2),[67,](#page-19-18)[72](#page-19-3) A large study in Europe found that productivity increased when working remotely from home as well as greater control over work[.6](#page-17-4) A study in Italy found that 39% of employees reported reduced productivity during remote work, [54](#page-19-15) and a study in Brazil similarly found that 69% of workers felt that their productivity had declined[.67](#page-19-18) Research in Austria found that remote workers were 1.48 times more likely to be unproductive when compared with their non–remote-working counterparts[.72](#page-19-3) Research in Japan found that productivity or presenteeism (being <span id="page-14-0"></span>present during virtual work by completing online log books) declined when workers worked remotely on a full-time basis[.64](#page-19-2) A study involving 704 academics found that productivity decreased in 50% of the sample, but approximately 25% of the academics found that they were more productive when working from home during the pandemic.[19](#page-18-1) However, they found that 70% were willing to work from home and could build on their work efficiency from this experience, which made them better prepared to undertake remote work in the future[.19](#page-18-1) Academics reported that they could work better in the traditional workplace when communicating with colleagues and undertaking necessary data collection, but they could focus more on data analysis and on the literature when working from home[.19](#page-18-1) Thus, it seems that productivity changes were not uniform when working from home, but also depended on the tasks, and that this transition suited some individuals and professions more than others. It also seems that adjusting and building habits associated with remote work is important for supporting productivity.

<span id="page-14-4"></span><span id="page-14-2"></span>Factors that affected productivity throughout the studies included caring for children[27](#page-18-8) or work–family conf licts[,36](#page-18-17) lack of regular office space (including a reserved desk and chair)[,6,](#page-17-4)[23](#page-18-4),[42](#page-18-23) distractions[,23](#page-18-4) lack of habit formation for working from hom[e27](#page-18-8) or self-leadership[,36](#page-18-17) isolation[36](#page-18-17) or emotional stress[,18,](#page-18-0)[68](#page-19-8) communication with co-workers and trust[,37](#page-18-20) satisfaction with remote wor[k20](#page-18-2) and with the relationship with the supervisor[,24](#page-18-5) and IT support.[42](#page-18-23) Productivity was also affected by higher levels of communication with co-workers and less isolation in tandem with overall good health[.23](#page-18-4) Thus, it seems that in order to stabilize or even increase productivity, employers should aim to improve communication with employees and their co-workers, reduce isolation, assist with an adequate home work-station setup, and promote a work-life balance. Productivity may also vary by income or type of employment. Older individuals and those in a higher income bracket were more likely to report being productive during remote work[,23](#page-18-4) indicating that there may be an inequality gap. A study in Norway further found that 38% of jobs can be performed remotely.[43](#page-18-24) This highlights that inequalities in remote work accessibility and capability to perform productively exist.[43](#page-18-24)

#### <span id="page-14-3"></span>*Working time*

In addition to productivity, 3 studies explored changes in work time during remote work. A large study in the United States found that working time increased by 1.5 extra hours of work each day when working from home[,23](#page-18-4) whereas another study in the United States found that 28% of workers increased their work hours by 1-3 hours during remote work[.40](#page-18-29) By contrast, in a Swedish study, individuals who worked from home slept for 34 minutes longer, which took away time from work[.41](#page-18-22) Thus, it is unclear whether work time increased or decreased for workers around the globe, given the conf licting findings. However, it should be noted that longer work hours do not necessarily linearly equate with increased productivity, and shorter work-weeks have been suggested in previous research for increasing productivity[.88](#page-20-11)

# <span id="page-14-6"></span>*Gender differences in productivity*

Gender differences in productivity were reported across some studies, but the results were variable. Men were more likely to report poor levels of productivity,[20](#page-18-2) and stress affected productivity more in men than in women in 1 study in Latin America[.58](#page-19-16) Likewise, in another study, women in the United States were found to report higher levels of productivity when working from home during remote online work or "telework.["23](#page-18-4) An analysis of Twitter/X posts in the United States found that women were more likely to post positive things about remote working life.[75](#page-19-19) By contrast, a study in Latvia found that women had more chores than men and that they were more likely to suffer from worklife imbalances[.49](#page-19-12) Similarly, a study in Turkey found that women had increased workloads, work hours, and chores, and were more likely to report stress than men[.61](#page-19-7) Women in the age group 18- 44 were particularly negatively affected by remote work relative to men in 1 study[.61](#page-19-7) Women were also found to have higher technostress scores than men in Italy[66](#page-19-17) and in Egypt[.35](#page-18-27) A large study in Europe found that men adapted to working from home better than women and had fewer office adaptability issues.[6](#page-17-4) A study in Brazil in academics found that women were less productive than men when submitting manuscripts during the pandemic, especially if they had children[.67](#page-19-18) Similarly, a study in academics in the United States found that they submitted significantly fewer manuscripts when working remotely from home[.48](#page-19-20) Thus, it appears that productivity was lower in females in the academic profession, but more research is needed to better understand whether this was a consistent trend. Likewise, it appears that there may be gender inequalities in home-office adaptability as well as balancing chores at home. Understanding reasons for differences in productivity and well-being, especially levels of support, role sharing in housework, and accessibility to childcare, is important for reducing inequalities in the homework sphere.

# **Job satisfaction**

Job satisfaction was measured by self-report questionnaires[6](#page-17-4)[,20,](#page-18-2)[24](#page-18-5),[28,](#page-18-9)[29](#page-18-10),[32](#page-18-19),[38,](#page-18-21)[42](#page-18-23),[47,](#page-18-18)[54,](#page-19-15)[58](#page-19-16),[68,](#page-19-8)[85](#page-20-9) and differed between the studies. A study across 29 European countries found that 55% of workers had an overall good experience when working from home[.6](#page-17-4) A study in Latin America, however, found that job satisfaction declined during remote work.[58](#page-19-16) By contrast, job satisfaction in Italian employees working from home remained the same for 50% of participants[54](#page-19-15) when compared with their former satisfaction in the traditional workplace. The exception was that workers who had neck or back pain were less likely to be satisfied with remote work.[54](#page-19-15) A study in Malaysian university employees found that 87% were satisfied with working from home, although their reported productivity was only 54%, due to gaps in the availability of telework technical support and equipment[.42](#page-18-23) A study in the United States found that 61% of workers enjoyed working at home and that 70% felt that they had more freedom[.38](#page-18-21)

Different factors across the studies that may affect remote job satisfaction include the type of contract (level of security), overall well-being and sleep, isolation, and work relations[.20,](#page-18-2)[28](#page-18-9),[29,](#page-18-10)[32,](#page-18-19)[47](#page-18-18),[58,](#page-19-16)[68](#page-19-8),[85](#page-20-9) A study found that employees had higher levels of job satisfaction when working from home only when they had a strict regular employment contract and not working under uncertain, precarious, or irregular employment conditions.[85](#page-20-9) Another study found that 74% of teleworkers reported poor sleep quality, which was inversely related to job satisfaction.[20](#page-18-2) Maintaining positive relations at work might also be integral for job satisfaction during the pandemic and that trust was a mediator between positive relations and job satisfaction.[28](#page-18-9) Autonomy[,29](#page-18-10) social identity in the workplace, and connectivity with co-workers were also found to be key determinants of remote work job satisfaction[,47](#page-18-18) whereas social isolation was associated with lower job satisfaction[29](#page-18-10) and overall productivity[68](#page-19-8) as well as stress[.68](#page-19-8) Satisfaction with the quality of supervision was also related to satisfaction[24](#page-18-5) as well as overall employee relations, including with co-workers and trust as a fundamental element[28](#page-18-9)

and identity leadership[.47](#page-18-18) There was also a positive relationship between well-being and overall remote job satisfaction[32](#page-18-19) and a negative relationship with stress and satisfaction[.58](#page-19-16) Thus, finding ways to improve relationships at work, improve sleep, and reduce stress may be beneficial for job satisfaction during telework.

# **Home office adjustment**

The home office as a physical space was identified as being an integral element of remote work in various domains including well-being and productivity. This includes a consideration of the desk, the table, the room, lighting, or technical aspects such as Wi-Fi[.6,](#page-17-4)[23](#page-18-4),[30,](#page-18-12)[35,](#page-18-27)[40](#page-18-29),[42,](#page-18-23)[56](#page-19-25),[59,](#page-19-6)[74](#page-19-11) Research in Japan found that home office lighting was integral for workers and that those who had inadequate lighting were 2 times as likely to suffer impairments in their work[.56](#page-19-25) Wi-Fi connectivity was not ideal for 22% of university staff in Egypt and was associated with technostress[.35](#page-18-27) Research in Australian academics found that most did not have access to a home office and worked primarily from their kitchens (42%), whereas others shared an office space (22%)[.30](#page-18-12) Interestingly, in the United States, 12% reported sharing office space when working remotely across diverse professions[.40](#page-18-29) Workers who had an adequate room to work in reported higher productivity compared with those who did not have acceptable home office adaptabaility[.23](#page-18-4),[42](#page-18-23) Owning desk space was associated with working longer during remote work[.23](#page-18-4) Adequate workspace, workstation, lack of distractions, and regular work hours were associated with higher well-being in remote workers in one study.[74](#page-19-11) A large study from 29 European countries found that the main setbacks and barriers associated with working from home during the pandemic were inadequate home office space/adaptability as well as insufficient tools available to employees.[6](#page-17-4) Thus, the home office space and its various dimensions are integral for supporting successful remote work and well-being.

<span id="page-15-1"></span>There is also some evidence that employees reported greater physical pain from ergonomic stressors when working from home. One study recommended an ergonomic work station for home office work and well-being during the pandemic[,89](#page-20-12) supporting previous research that found that 50% of employees reported greater neck pain when working from home.[54](#page-19-15) Overall workrelated health indicators declined in remote workers in one study[.24](#page-18-5) Another study found a negative relationship between home desk and chair ergonomic and overall suitability and musculoskeletal strain[.62](#page-19-24) Thus, employers should make efforts to reduce ergonomic stressors by providing their employees with suitable adjustable chairs and workstations. In addition to this, a study that investigated home office adaptability in health care workers found that not all could adapt equally to the home office, especially those who required seeing patients, technical support, or when hand on work at the actual work setting was necessary to complete the tasks[.46](#page-18-25) Thus, the home office should ideally be created to maximize working opportunities, but even with adjustments, some professions are not suited for homebased work.

# **Leadership style**

<span id="page-15-2"></span><span id="page-15-0"></span>In addition to managerial support, which was described previously, the actual leadership style played a role in shaping remote worker well-being[.37,](#page-18-20)[47,](#page-18-18)[50](#page-19-13),[61,](#page-19-7)[66](#page-19-17),[70](#page-19-28),[90](#page-20-13) Participative leadership was an important determinant of employee health, whereby employees were empowered to be active decision makers in the workplace[.70](#page-19-28) Another study found that identity leadership, through greater group cohesion and sense of collective belonging in the workplace, was positively related to work satisfaction and negatively related to loneliness during remote work[.47](#page-18-18) Additionally, leadership style was found to moderate the effect on well-being of working from home. For example, intrusive leadership was found to be negatively associated with mental health and well-being in workers (increased depression, anxiety, and reduced happiness).[50](#page-19-13) In other words, pushing workers to be workaholics through excessive pressure was found to be detrimental to well-being[.50](#page-19-13)

Communication and trust in leaders were found to be integral during remote work, especially doing virtual teams.[37](#page-18-20) Low levels of perceived control in the work setting and higher workloads were associated with lower levels of mental health and well-being[.61](#page-19-7) A study in Italian university workers and administrators found that highly authoritarian leadership was detrimental to work-life balance, as it promoted workaholism and led to increased levels of technostress (stress associated with using technology)[.66](#page-19-17) Likewise, intrusive or toxic leadership was found to be associated with higher levels of stress in a study in Italy in trade and service sector workers[.50](#page-19-13) Thus, this form of leadership demonstrates negative effects in diverse employees. Another study suggested that trust in leaders, effective communication, empowerment, and social cohesion are all integral for successful virtual teams[.37](#page-18-20) A study suggested that responsible management and strategic leadership are essential for workplace well-being and overall performance when working from home[.90](#page-20-13) Work uncertainties were identified as key setbacks associated with remote work in a large study across Europe[,6](#page-17-4) highlighting the need for clear direction, role identity, and organizational leadership. Interestingly, not only leadership by top management, but also self-leadership in the form of selfdirection and personal initiative were important for productivity during remote work[.36](#page-18-17) Thus, employees also seem to have a role in managing and organizing themselves in their new home-work office sphere.

# **Discussion**

The aims of this study were to review the relationship between remote work and well-being, including its determinants, as well as its relationship with work-life balance, productivity, job satisfaction, and home office adaptability. This review also aimed to better understand the role of management and leadership in promoting well-being and ideal remote working conditions.

The dimensions associated with remote work life in employees who worked at home during the COVID-19 pandemic have been reviewed. This is important given that it explored various dimensions of remote workplace health and well-being in depth on a global scale. It is novel as it focused on several key areas that are interconnected, including remote workplace well-being and its determinants, work-life balance, productivity, the roles of management and leadership, job satisfaction, and home office adaptability. The review also compared differences in gender across each dimension, highlighting inequities in remote worker wellbeing and aspects of work at home. The review was not limited to early stages of lockdown in March 2020 but included research on remote work throughout 2021 (second and third lockdown waves), demonstrating some longer-term effects of remote work rather than focusing on only the immediate adjustment over the short term. Although this review found variability across studies, including between countries and different employment sectors, several emergent themes were identified. Their implications for the workplace and well-being will be discussed.

First, many employees enjoyed working at home overall. Nevertheless, social isolation and loneliness were identified as barriers in many studies. This review found that remote workplace lone<span id="page-16-0"></span>liness has an impact on well-being and stress. Finding ways to engage workers with their co-workers and with their managers is one solution that may ease isolation, given that several studies found that co-worker and employee support are integral. It is no surprise to find that social support is a prerequisite for employee well-being when working remotely from home. Previous Whitehall II studies on workplace health found that social support was integral for workplace well-being, supporting the findings in this review[.91](#page-20-14) A previous review similarly recommended that employers should provide social networking opportunities for employees when working from home[.81](#page-20-4) Some commercially available apps have been recently developed that aim to provide a platform for employees to connect and feel less isolated, such as SquadPal[,92](#page-20-15) which is a social remote work messaging app for co-workers. More research is needed to develop evidence-based resources for employees. There is a need for future public health interventions to be tailored to the current needs of remote workers, by targeting the determinants of remote work isolation and loneliness.

<span id="page-16-1"></span>Second, work-life balance may be positively or negatively impacted by remote work, which was also found to inf luence wellbeing and stress. This is contingent upon regulation of work hours, and supervisory support. A review suggested that companies will need to find ways to manage the boundaries between work and private life for future remote workers[.81](#page-20-4) Productivity is both positively and negatively affected by remote work, depending on the contextual living situation. Factors that need to be considered include work office adaptability and accessibility to IT support, which were identified as determinants of successful remote work from home. Employers should provide employees with desks, ergonomic chairs, and other necessary work tools that will promote workplace well-being and productivity in the homework sphere. Similar to our review, previous reviews found that employers should provide employees with sufficient technical support when working from home[.78,](#page-20-1)[81](#page-20-4) Another review had suggested that companies should have working from home indicators, [81](#page-20-4) and another suggested that employee skills training is needed[.93](#page-20-16) Finally, productivity may be affected by childcaring, hence the need for universal daycare accessibility, not only but especially when people need to work from home.

<span id="page-16-2"></span>Third, this review found that leadership plays an important role in remote work. This not only includes leadership style, by being less authoritative or "toxic," but also includes effective communication and trust building. Toxic leadership was associated with higher stress and was not conducive to well-being but rather to workaholism[.50,](#page-19-13)[66](#page-19-17) This review found that employees had better overall experiences when they had good relationships with their supervisors as well as co-workers. A review suggested that companies should readjust their structure to be more equitable and less hierarchal, whilst ensuring a fine balance between productivity and taking care of the well-being of employees.[94](#page-20-17) Another review concluded that levels of organizational support are integral for remote workplace well-being[.95](#page-20-18) Indeed, effort-reward balance and level of control and decisional support had been previously identified as being integral to workplace well-being and health in the classic Whitehall studies in workers[.91](#page-20-14) Similar strategies should be applied to remote work, whereby managers should aim to promote effort-reward balance and provide employees with greater control.

<span id="page-16-4"></span><span id="page-16-3"></span>Self-leadership and identity also appear to be important, as employees who had a clear direction of what they were doing and had created a routine in their remote work life, had a better experience when working from home. Thus, it appears that "it takes two to tango" when working remotely, as one must have self-discipline in tandem with effective leadership from supervisors. A review also suggested that leaders should clarify roles for employees, to set a clear direction when working from home[.81](#page-20-4)

<span id="page-17-17"></span>Fourth, attention needs to be paid to special groups, especially women and those with children who may find it challenging to cope with both work and childcare. Nevertheless, this review did find that some women enjoyed working from home more than men. Reasons for differences between studies could be due to factors such as accessibility to childcare. Supporting women through universally accessible childcare may reduce any inequalities[96](#page-20-19) from remote work. Both gender and access to childcare have been identified as some of the social determinants of health by Raphael,[96](#page-20-19) highlighting that these determinants need to be targeted by policymakers in order to ensure that working from home will be equitable. A review also found that women did not have improvements in their health when working from home.[81](#page-20-4) Additionally, more studies on remote work and domestic abuse are needed, to better understand the needs of vulnerable populations who are working from home and to develop policy and public health interventions.

<span id="page-17-18"></span>In addition to gender,more research is needed in diverse groups to better understand diverse needs. One study examined the effects of disability on remote work and found that individuals with a disability were more likely to work from home and could benefit from this new adjustment in the workplace setting[.97](#page-20-20) Thus, future research could further explore the dynamics between remote work and disabled workers, to support equity when working from home. Additionally, there is a gap in the remote work literature, whereby differences according to age group, ethnicity, and socio-economic status were not evaluated. Future studies should explore these dimensions to better understand and address health and work inequities. Finally, as many studies used self-report questionnaires assessing constructs of interest, there is a need for greater validation of these measures and more universal scales to measure this emerging work-related and well-being dynamic in the home-work sphere.

# **Conclusion**

In summary, this review found that remote workplace well-being varies on a continuum, and factors such as employment characteristics, gender, isolation and loneliness, co-worker support, leadership style and support, as well as home office conditions all play a role. Whereas some workers had a positive experience with remote work, others experienced challenges. Remote work may promote well-being if conditions are supportive and when barriers such as isolation, loneliness, and work-life imbalances are reduced. Productivity and job satisfaction may be enhanced through greater support from managers and by offering employees support with their office setup, and by providing women and those with children with adequate accessibility to childcare.

# **Funding**

None declared.

# **Conf licts of interest**

No conf lict of interest to declare.

# **References**

<span id="page-17-0"></span>[1.](#page-1-0) Xiong J, Lipsitz O, Nasri F *et al.* Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on mental health in the general population: a systematic

- review. *J Affect Disord*. 2020;**277**:55-64. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2020.08.001) [jad.2020.08.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2020.08.001)
- <span id="page-17-1"></span>[2.](#page-1-1) Posel D, Oyenubi A, Kollamparambil U. Job loss and mental health during the COVID-19 lockdown: evidence from South Africa. *PLoS One*. 2021;**16**:e0249352. [https://doi.org/10.1371/](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0249352) [journal.pone.0249352](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0249352)
- <span id="page-17-2"></span>[3.](#page-1-2) Hamouche S. COVID-19 and employees' mental health: stressors, moderators and agenda for organizational actions. *Emerald Open Research*. 2020;**2**:15. [https://doi.org/10.35241/](https://doi.org/10.35241/emeraldopenres.13550.1) [emeraldopenres.13550.1](https://doi.org/10.35241/emeraldopenres.13550.1)
- <span id="page-17-3"></span>[4.](#page-1-3) Zhang C, Yu MC, Marin S. Exploring public sentiment on enforced remote work during COVID-19. *J Appl Psychol*. 2021;**106**:797-810. <https://doi.org/10.1037/apl0000933>
- <span id="page-17-16"></span>[5.](#page-6-0) Lizana PA, Vega-Fernadez G. Teacher teleworking during the COVID-19 pandemic: association between work hours, workfamily balance and quality of life. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18:7566**. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18147566>
- <span id="page-17-4"></span>[6.](#page-1-4) Ipsen C, van Veldhoven M, Kirchner K, Hansen JP. Six key advantages and disadvantages of working from home in Europe during COVID-19. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18:1826**. [https://](https://doi.org/doi:10.3390/ijerph18041826) [doi.org/doi:10.3390/ijerph18041826](https://doi.org/doi:10.3390/ijerph18041826)
- <span id="page-17-5"></span>[7.](#page-1-5) Peroni KJOCC. One in three Luxembourg residents report their mental health declined during the COVID-19 crisis. *Int J Community Wellbeing.* 2020;**4**:345-351. [https://doi.org/doi:10.1007/](https://doi.org/doi: 10.1007/s42413-020-00093-4) [s42413-020-00093-4](https://doi.org/doi: 10.1007/s42413-020-00093-4)
- <span id="page-17-6"></span>[8.](#page-1-6) Morris SE, Moment A, Thomas JD. Caring for bereaved family members during the COVID-19 pandemic: before and after the death of a patient. *J Pain Symptom Manag*. 2020;**60**:e70-e74. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2020.05.002>
- <span id="page-17-7"></span>[9.](#page-1-7) Maff ly-Kipp J, Eisenbeck N, Carreno DF, Hicks J. Mental health inequalities increase as a function of COVID-19 pandemic severity levels. *Soc Sci Med*. 2021;**285**:114275. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2021.114275) [socscimed.2021.114275](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2021.114275)
- <span id="page-17-8"></span>[10.](#page-1-8) Su Z, Cheshmehzangi A, McDonnell D, Segalo S, Ahmad ˇ J, Bennett B. Gender inequality and health disparity amid COVID-19. *Nurs Outlook*. 2022;**70**:89-95. [https://doi.org/10.1016/](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.outlook.2021.08.004) [j.outlook.2021.08.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.outlook.2021.08.004)
- <span id="page-17-9"></span>[11.](#page-1-9) Belsey-Priebe M, Lyons D, Buonocore JJ. COVID-19's impact on American women's food insecurity foreshadows vulnerabilities to climate change. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18:6867**. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18136867>
- <span id="page-17-10"></span>[12.](#page-1-10) Viero A, Barbara G, Montisci M, Kustermann K, Cattaneo C. Violence against women in the Covid-19 pandemic: a review of the literature and a call for shared strategies to tackle health and social emergencies. *Forensic Sci Int*. 2021;**319**:110650. [https://](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2020.110650) [doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2020.110650](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2020.110650)
- <span id="page-17-11"></span>[13.](#page-1-11) Yang JW, Suh C, Lee CK, Son BC. The work-life balance and psychosocial well-being of South Korean workers. *Ann Occup Environ Med*. 2018;**30**:38. [https://doi.org/10.1186/](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40557-018-0250-z) [s40557-018-0250-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40557-018-0250-z)
- <span id="page-17-12"></span>[14.](#page-1-12) Faragher EB, Cass M, Cooper CL. The relationship between job satisfaction and health: a meta-analysis. *Occup Environ Med*. 2005;**62**:105-112. <https://doi.org/10.1136/oem.2002.006734>
- <span id="page-17-13"></span>[15.](#page-1-13) Mitchell RJ, Bates P. Measuring health-related productivity loss. *Popul Health Manag*. 2011;**14**:93-98. [https://doi.org/10.1089/](https://doi.org/10.1089/pop.2010.0014) [pop.2010.0014](https://doi.org/10.1089/pop.2010.0014)
- <span id="page-17-14"></span>[16.](#page-1-14) Murphy KR. Life after COVID-19: what if we never go back to the office? *Irish J Manag*. 2021;**40**:78-85. [https://doi.org/doi:10.2478/](https://doi.org/doi:10.2478/ijm-2021-0007) [ijm-2021-0007](https://doi.org/doi:10.2478/ijm-2021-0007)
- <span id="page-17-15"></span>[17.](#page-1-15) Kniffin KM, Narayanan J, Anseel F *et al.* COVID-19 and the workplace: implications, issues, and insights for future research and action. *Am Psychol*. 2021;**76**:63-77. [https://doi.org/10.1037/](https://doi.org/10.1037/amp0000716) [amp0000716](https://doi.org/10.1037/amp0000716)

- <span id="page-18-0"></span>[18.](#page-2-2) Abdel Hadi S, Bakker AB, Häusser JA. The role of leisure crafting for emotional exhaustion in telework during the COVID-19 pandemic. *Anxiety Stress Coping*. 2021;**34**:530-544. [https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1080/10615806.2021.1903447) [org/10.1080/10615806.2021.1903447](https://doi.org/10.1080/10615806.2021.1903447)
- <span id="page-18-1"></span>[19.](#page-2-3) Aczel B, Kovacs M, van der Lippe T, Szaszi B. Researchers working from home: benefits and challenges. *PLoS One*. 2021;**16**:e0249127. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0249127>
- <span id="page-18-2"></span>[20.](#page-2-4) Afonso P, Fonseca M, Teodoro T. Evaluation of anxiety, depression and sleep quality in full-time teleworkers. *J Public Health (Oxf)*. 2022;**44**:797-804. <https://doi.org/10.1093/pubmed/fdab164>
- <span id="page-18-11"></span>[21.](#page-2-5) Almhdawi KA, Obeidat D, Kanaan SF *et al.* University professors' mental and physical well-being during the COVID-19 pandemic and distance teaching. *Work*. 2021;**69**:1153-1161. [https://](https://doi.org/10.3233/wor-205276) [doi.org/10.3233/wor-205276](https://doi.org/10.3233/wor-205276)
- <span id="page-18-3"></span>[22.](#page-2-6) Andel SA, Shen W, Arvan ML. Depending on your own kindness: the moderating role of self-compassion on the withinperson consequences of work loneliness during the COVID-19 pandemic. *J Occup Health Psychol*. 2021;**26**:276-290. [https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1037/ocp0000271) [org/10.1037/ocp0000271](https://doi.org/10.1037/ocp0000271)
- <span id="page-18-4"></span>[23.](#page-2-7) Awada M, Lucas G, Becerik-Gerber B, Roll S. Working from home during the COVID-19 pandemic: impact on office worker productivity and work experience. *Work*. 2021;**69**:1171-1189. [https://](https://doi.org/10.3233/wor-210301) [doi.org/10.3233/wor-210301](https://doi.org/10.3233/wor-210301)
- <span id="page-18-5"></span>[24.](#page-2-8) Barone Gibbs B, Kline CE, Huber KA, Paley JL, Perera S. Covid-19 shelter-at-home and work, lifestyle and well-being in desk workers. *Occup Med (Lond)*. 2021;**71**:86-94. [https://doi.org/doi:10.1093/](https://doi.org/doi:10.1093/occmed/kqab011) [occmed/kqab011](https://doi.org/doi:10.1093/occmed/kqab011)
- <span id="page-18-6"></span>[25.](#page-2-9) Barriga Medina HR, Campoverde Aguirre R, Coello-Montecel D, Ochoa Pacheco P, Paredes-Aguirre MI. The inf luence of workfamily conf lict on burnout during the COVID-19 pandemic: the effect of teleworking overload. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18:10302**. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph181910302>
- <span id="page-18-7"></span>[26.](#page-2-10) Bennett AA, Campion ED, Keeler KR, Keener SK. Videoconference fatigue? Exploring changes in fatigue after videoconference meetings during COVID-19. *J Appl Psychol.* 2021;**106**: 330-344. <https://doi.org/10.1037/apl0000906>
- <span id="page-18-8"></span>[27.](#page-2-11) Beno M, Hvorecky J. Data on an Austrian company's productivity in the pre-Covid-19 era, during the lockdown and after its easing: to work remotely or not? *Front Commun (Lausanne)*. 2021;**6**:641199. <https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomm.2021.641199>
- <span id="page-18-9"></span>[28.](#page-2-12) Bulinska-Stangrecka H, Bagie ´ nska A. The role of employee rela- ´ tions in shaping job satisfaction as an element promoting positive mental health at work in the era of COVID-19. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18:1903**. [https://doi.org/doi:10.3390/](https://doi.org/doi:10.3390/ijerph18041903) [ijerph18041903](https://doi.org/doi:10.3390/ijerph18041903)
- <span id="page-18-10"></span>[29.](#page-2-13) Chan MK, Sharkey JD, Lawrie SI, Arch DAN, Nylund-Gibson K. Elementary school teacher well-being and supportive measures amid COVID-19: an exploratory study. *Sch Psychol*. 2021;**36**: 533-545. <https://doi.org/10.1037/spq0000441>
- <span id="page-18-12"></span>[30.](#page-2-14) Chapman DG, Thamrin C. Scientists in pyjamas: characterising the working arrangements and productivity of Australian medical researchers during the COVID-19 pandemic. *Med J Aust*. 2020;**213**:516-520. <https://doi.org/10.5694/mja2.50860>
- <span id="page-18-13"></span>[31.](#page-2-15) Conroy DA, Hadler NL, Cho E *et al.* The effects of COVID-19 stayat-home order on sleep, health, and working patterns: a survey study of US health care workers. *J Clin Sleep Med*. 2021;**17**:185-191. <https://doi.org/doi:10.5664/jcsm.8808>
- <span id="page-18-19"></span>[32.](#page-4-0) Davidsen AH, Petersen MS. The impact of COVID-19 restrictions on mental well-being and working life among Faroese employees. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18:4775**. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/doi:10.3390/ijerph18094775) [doi:10.3390/ijerph18094775](https://doi.org/doi:10.3390/ijerph18094775)
- <span id="page-18-14"></span>[33.](#page-2-16) Escudero-Castillo I, Mato-Díaz FJ, Rodriguez-Alvarez A. Furloughs, teleworking and other work situations during the

- COVID-19 lockdown: impact on mental well-being. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18:2898**. [https://doi.org/doi:10.3390/](https://doi.org/doi:10.3390/ijerph18062898) [ijerph18062898](https://doi.org/doi:10.3390/ijerph18062898)
- <span id="page-18-26"></span>[34.](#page-9-0) Estrada-Muñoz C, Vega-Muñoz A, Castillo D, Müller-Pérez S, Boada-Grau J. Technostress of Chilean teachers in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic and teleworking. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18:5458**. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18105458>
- <span id="page-18-27"></span>[35.](#page-9-1) Gabr HM, Soliman SS, Allam HK, Raouf SYA. Effects of remote virtual work environment during COVID-19 pandemic on technostress among Menoufia University staff, Egypt: a crosssectional study. *Environ Sci Pollut Res Int*. 2021;**28**:53746-53753. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-021-14588-w>
- <span id="page-18-17"></span>[36.](#page-2-17) Galanti T, Guidetti G, Mazzei E, Zappalà S, Toscano F. Work from home during the COVID-19 outbreak: the impact on employees' remote work productivity, engagement, and stress. *J Occup Environ Med*. 2021;**63**:e426-e432. [https://doi.org/10.1097/](https://doi.org/10.1097/jom.0000000000002236) [jom.0000000000002236](https://doi.org/10.1097/jom.0000000000002236)
- <span id="page-18-20"></span>[37.](#page-4-1) Garro-Abarca V, Palos-Sanchez P, Aguayo-Camacho M. Virtual teams in times of pandemic: factors that inf luence performance. *Front Psychol*. 2021;**12**:624637. [https://doi.org/10.3389/](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.624637) [fpsyg.2021.624637](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.624637)
- <span id="page-18-21"></span>[38.](#page-4-2) George TJ, Atwater LE, Maneethai D, Madera JM. Supporting the productivity and wellbeing of remote workers: lessons from COVID-19. *Organ Dyn*. 2022;**51**:100869. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orgdyn.2021.100869) [orgdyn.2021.100869](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orgdyn.2021.100869)
- <span id="page-18-28"></span>[39.](#page-10-0) Ghislieri C, Molino M, Dolce V, Sanseverino D, Presutti M. Workfamily conf lict during the Covid-19 pandemic: teleworking of administrative and technical staff in healthcare. An Italian study. *Med Lav*. 2021;**112**:229-240. [https://doi.org/doi:10.23749/](https://doi.org/doi:10.23749/mdl.v112i3.11227) [mdl.v112i3.11227](https://doi.org/doi:10.23749/mdl.v112i3.11227)
- <span id="page-18-29"></span>[40.](#page-12-0) Guler MA, Guler K, Guneser Gulec M, Ozdoglar E. Working from home during a pandemic: investigation of the impact of COVID-19 on employee health and productivity. *J Occup Environ Med*. 2021;**63**:731-741. [https://doi.org/10.1097/](https://doi.org/10.1097/jom.0000000000002277) [jom.0000000000002277](https://doi.org/10.1097/jom.0000000000002277)
- <span id="page-18-22"></span>[41.](#page-4-3) Hallman DM, Januario LB, Mathiassen SE, Heiden M, Svensson S, Bergström G. Working from home during the COVID-19 outbreak in Sweden: effects on 24-h time-use in office workers. *BMC Public Health*. 2021;**21**:528. [https://doi.org/doi:10.1186/](https://doi.org/doi:10.1186/s12889-021-10582-6) [s12889-021-10582-6](https://doi.org/doi:10.1186/s12889-021-10582-6)
- <span id="page-18-23"></span>[42.](#page-5-0) Hashim R, Bakar A, Noh I, Mahyudin HA. Employees' job satisfaction and performance through working from home during the pandemic lockdown. *Environ-Behav Proc J*. 2020;**5**:461-467. <https://doi.org/doi:10.21834/ebpj.v5i15.2515>
- <span id="page-18-24"></span>[43.](#page-5-1) Holgersen H, Jia Z, Svenkerud S. Who and how many can work from home? Evidence from task descriptions. *J Labour Mark Res*. 2021;**55**:4. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12651-021-00287-z>
- <span id="page-18-15"></span>[44.](#page-2-18) Izdebski ZW, Mazur J. Changes in mental well-being of adult Poles in the early period of the COVID-19 pandemic with reference to their occupational activity and remote work. *Int J Occup Med Environ Health*. 2021;**34**:251-262. [https://doi.org/10.13075/](https://doi.org/10.13075/ijomeh.1896.01778) [ijomeh.1896.01778](https://doi.org/10.13075/ijomeh.1896.01778)
- <span id="page-18-16"></span>[45.](#page-2-19) Kotera Y, Maxwell-Jones R, Edwards AM, Knutton N. Burnout in professional psychotherapists: relationships with selfcompassion, work-life balance, and telepressure. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18:5308**. [https://doi.org/10.3390/](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18105308) [ijerph18105308](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18105308)
- <span id="page-18-25"></span>[46.](#page-6-1) Krückl JS, Moeller J, Gaupp R *et al.* Implementing home office work at a large psychiatric hniversity hospital in Switzerland during the COVID-19 pandemic: field report. *JMIR Ment*. *Health*. 2021;**8**:e28849. <https://doi.org/10.2196/28849>
- <span id="page-18-18"></span>[47.](#page-2-20) Krug H, Haslam SA, Otto K, Steffens NK. Identity leadership, social identity continuity, and well-being at work during

- COVID-19. *Front Psychol*. 2021;**12**:684475. [https://doi.org/10.3389/](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.684475) [fpsyg.2021.684475](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.684475)
- <span id="page-19-20"></span>[48.](#page-10-1) Krukowski RA, Jagsi R, Cardel MI. Academic productivity differences by gender and child age in science, technology, engineering, mathematics, and medicine faculty during the COVID-19 pandemic. *J Women's Health (Larchmt)*. 2021;**30**:341-347. [https://](https://doi.org/10.1089/jwh.2020.8710) [doi.org/10.1089/jwh.2020.8710](https://doi.org/10.1089/jwh.2020.8710)
- <span id="page-19-12"></span>[49.](#page-6-2) Lonska J, Mietule I, Litavniece L *et al.* Work-life balance of the employed population during the emergency situation of COVID-19 in Latvia. *Front Psychol*. 2021;**12**:682459. [https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.682459) [org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.682459](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.682459)
- <span id="page-19-13"></span>[50.](#page-6-3) Magnavita N, Tripepi G, Chiorri C. Telecommuting, off-time work, and intrusive leadership in workers' well-being. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18**:3330. [https://doi.org/oi:10.3390/](https://doi.org/oi:10.3390/ijerph18073330) [ijerph18073330](https://doi.org/oi:10.3390/ijerph18073330)
- <span id="page-19-14"></span>[51.](#page-6-4) McDowell CP, Herring MP, Lansing J, Brower CS, Meyer JD. Associations between employment changes and mental health: US data from during the COVID-19 pandemic. *Front Psychol*. 2021;**12**:631510. <https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.631510>
- <span id="page-19-21"></span>[52.](#page-10-2) Meyer B, Zill A, Dilba D, Gerlach R, Schumann S. Employee psychological well-being during the COVID-19 pandemic in Germany: a longitudinal study of demands, resources, and exhaustion. *Int J Psychol*. 2021;**56**:532-550. [https://doi.org/10.1002/](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijop.12743) [ijop.12743](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijop.12743)
- <span id="page-19-5"></span>[53.](#page-2-21) Miyake F, Odgerel C-O, Hino A *et al.* Job stress and loneliness among desk workers during the COVID-19 pandemic in Japan: focus on remote working. *Environ Health Prev Med*. 2022;**27**:33. <https://doi.org/10.1265/ehpm.22-00107>
- <span id="page-19-15"></span>[54.](#page-7-0) Moretti A, Menna F, Aulicino M, Paoletta M, Liguori S, Iolascon G. Characterization of home working population during COVID-19 emergency: a cross-sectional analysis. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2020;**17:6284**. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17176284>
- <span id="page-19-1"></span>[55.](#page-2-22) Niu Q, Nagata T, Fukutani N *et al.* Health effects of immediate telework introduction during the COVID-19 era in Japan: a cross-sectional study. *PLoS One*. 2021;**16**:e0256530. [https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0256530) [org/10.1371/journal.pone.0256530](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0256530)
- <span id="page-19-25"></span>[56.](#page-12-1) Okawara M, Ishimaru T, Tateishi S *et al.* Association between the physical work environment and work functioning impairment while working from home under the COVID-19 pandemic in Japanese workers. *J Occup Environ Med*. 2021;**63**:e565-e570. <https://doi.org/10.1097/jom.0000000000002280>
- <span id="page-19-27"></span>[57.](#page-12-2) Salazar A, Palomo-Osuna J, de Sola H, Moral-Munoz JA, Dueñas M, Failde I. Psychological impact of the lockdown due to the COVID-19 pandemic in university workers: factors related to stress, anxiety, and depression. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18:4367**. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18084367>
- <span id="page-19-16"></span>[58.](#page-7-1) Sandoval-Reyes J, Idrovo-Carlier S, Duque-Oliva EJ. Remote work, work stress, and work-life during pandemic times: a Latin America situation. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18:7069**. [https://](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18137069) [doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18137069](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18137069)
- <span id="page-19-6"></span>[59.](#page-2-23) Savolainen I, Oksa R, Savela N, Celuch M, Oksanen A. COVID-19 anxiety—a longitudinal survey study of psychological and situational risks among Finnish workers. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18:794**. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18020794>
- <span id="page-19-23"></span>[60.](#page-10-3) Schade HM, Digutsch J, Kleinsorge T, Fan Y. Having to work from home: basic needs, well-being, and motivation. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18:5149**. [https://doi.org/10.3390/](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18105149) [ijerph18105149](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18105149)
- <span id="page-19-24"></span><span id="page-19-7"></span>[61.](#page-2-24) Sentürk E, Sa ¸ galtıcı E, Geni¸ ˘ s B, Günday TÖ. Predictors of depression, anxiety and stress among remote workers during the COVID-19 pandemic. *Work*. 2021;**70**:41-51. [https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.3233/wor-210082) [org/10.3233/wor-210082](https://doi.org/10.3233/wor-210082)

- [62.](#page-11-0) Seva RR, Tejero LMS, Fadrilan-Camacho VFF. Barriers and facilitators of productivity while working from home during pandemic. *J Occup Health*. 2021;**63**:e12242. [https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1002/1348-9585.12242) [org/10.1002/1348-9585.12242](https://doi.org/10.1002/1348-9585.12242)
- <span id="page-19-22"></span>[63.](#page-10-4) Sharma N, Vaish H. Impact of COVID-19 on mental health and physical load on women professionals: an online cross-sectional survey. *Health Care Women Int*. 2020;**41**:1255-1272. [https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1080/07399332.2020.1825441) [org/10.1080/07399332.2020.1825441](https://doi.org/10.1080/07399332.2020.1825441)
- <span id="page-19-2"></span>[64.](#page-2-25) Shimura A, Yokoi K, Ishibashi Y, Akatsuka Y, Inoue T. Remote work decreases psychological and physical stress responses, but full-remote work increases presenteeism. *Front Psychol*. 2021;**12**:730969. <https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.730969>
- <span id="page-19-26"></span>[65.](#page-12-3) Shockley KM, Clark MA, Dodd H, King EB. Work-family strategies during COVID-19: examining gender dynamics among dualearner couples with young children. *J Appl Psychol*. 2021;**106**:15- 28. <https://doi.org/10.1037/apl0000857>
- <span id="page-19-17"></span>[66.](#page-7-2) Spagnoli P, Molino M, Molinaro D, Giancaspro ML, Manuti A, Ghislieri C. Workaholism and technostress during the COVID-19 emergency: the crucial role of the leaders on remote working. *Front Psychol*. 2020;**11**:620310. [https://doi.org/10.3389/](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.620310) [fpsyg.2020.620310](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.620310)
- <span id="page-19-18"></span>[67.](#page-7-3) Staniscuaski F, Kmetzsch L, Soletti RC *et al.* Gender, race and parenthood impact academic productivity during the COVID-19 pandemic: from survey to action. *Front Psychol*. 2021;**12**:663252. <https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.663252>
- <span id="page-19-8"></span>[68.](#page-2-26) Toscano F, Zappalà S. Social isolation and stress as predictors of productivity perception and remote work satisfaction during the COVID-19 pandemic: the role of concern about the virus in a moderated double mediation. *Sustainability*. 2020;**12**:9804. <https://doi.org/10.3390/su12239804>
- <span id="page-19-9"></span>[69.](#page-2-27) Tusl M, Brauchli R, Kerksieck P, Bauer GF. Impact of the COVID- ˇ 19 crisis on work and private life, mental well-being and self-rated health in German and Swiss employees: a crosssectional online survey. *BMC Public Health*. 2021;**21**:741. [https://](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-021-10788-8) [doi.org/10.1186/s12889-021-10788-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-021-10788-8)
- <span id="page-19-28"></span>[70.](#page-15-0) Usman M, Ghani U, Cheng J, Farid T, Iqbal S. Does participative leadership matter in employees' outcomes during COVID-19? Role of leader behavioral integrity. *Front Psychol*. 2021;**12**:646442. <https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.646442>
- <span id="page-19-10"></span>[71.](#page-2-28) Van Der Feltz-Cornelis CM, Varley D, Allgar VL, de Beurs E. Workplace stress, presenteeism, absenteeism, and resilience amongst university staff and students in the COVID-19 lockdown. *Front Psychiatry*. 2020;**11**:588803. [https://doi.org/10.3389/](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2020.588803) [fpsyt.2020.588803](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2020.588803)
- <span id="page-19-3"></span>[72.](#page-2-29) Weitzer J, Papantoniou K, Seidel S *et al.* Working from home, quality of life, and perceived productivity during the first 50 day COVID-19 mitigation measures in Austria: a cross-sectional study. *Int Arch Occup Environ Health*. 2021;**94**:1823-1837. [https://](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00420-021-01692-0) [doi.org/10.1007/s00420-021-01692-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00420-021-01692-0)
- <span id="page-19-4"></span>[73.](#page-2-30) Wood SJ, Michaelides G, Inceoglu I *et al.* Homeworking, wellbeing and the COVID-19 pandemic: a diary study. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18:7575**. [https://doi.org/10.3390/](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18147575) [ijerph18147575](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18147575)
- <span id="page-19-11"></span>[74.](#page-2-31) Xiao Y, Becerik-Gerber B, Lucas G, Roll SC. Impacts of working from home during COVID-19 pandemic on physical and mental well-being of office workstation users. *J Occup Environ Med*. 2021;**63**:181-190. [https://doi.org/10.1097/](https://doi.org/10.1097/jom.0000000000002097) [jom.0000000000002097](https://doi.org/10.1097/jom.0000000000002097)
- <span id="page-19-19"></span><span id="page-19-0"></span>[75.](#page-8-0) Xiong Z, Li P, Lyu H, Luo J. Social media opinions on working from home in the United States during the COVID-19 pandemic: observational study. *JMIR Med*. *Inform*. 2021;**9**:e29195. [https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.2196/29195) [org/10.2196/29195](https://doi.org/10.2196/29195)

- [76.](#page-2-32) Yoshimoto T, Fujii T, Oka H, Kasahara S, Kawamata K, Matsudaira K. Pain status and its association with physical activity, psychological stress, and telework among Japanese workers with pain during the COVID-19 pandemic. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18:5595**. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18115595>
- <span id="page-20-0"></span>[77.](#page-2-33) Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG, The PRISMA Group. Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and metaanalyses: the PRISMA statement. *PLoS Med*. 2009;**6**:e1000097. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097>
- <span id="page-20-1"></span>[78.](#page-2-34) Lengen JC, Kordsmeyer AC, Rohwer E, Harth V, Mache S. Social isolation among teleworkers in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Soziale Isolation im Homeoffice im Kontext der COVID-19-Pandemie. *Zentralbl Arbeitsmed Arbeitsschutz Ergon*. 2021;**71**:63-68. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s40664-020-00410-w>
- <span id="page-20-2"></span>[79.](#page-13-1) Nitschke JP, Forbes PAG, Ali N *et al.* Resilience during uncertainty? Greater social connectedness during COVID-19 lockdown is associated with reduced distress and fatigue. *Br J Health Psychol*. 2021;**26**:553-569. <https://doi.org/10.1111/bjhp.12485>
- <span id="page-20-3"></span>[80.](#page-13-2) Mäkiniemi JP, Oksanen A, Mäkikangas A. Loneliness and wellbeing during the COVID-19 pandemic: the moderating roles of personal, social and organizational resources on perceived stress and exhaustion among Finnish university employees. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18**:7146. [https://doi.org/10.3390/](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18137146) [ijerph18137146](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18137146)
- <span id="page-20-4"></span>[81.](#page-13-3) Oakman J, Kinsman N, Stuckey R, Graham M, Weale V. A rapid review of mental and physical health effects of working at home: how do we optimise health? *BMC Public Health*. 2020;**20**:1825. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-020-09875-z>
- <span id="page-20-5"></span>[82.](#page-14-0) Bonacini L, Gallo G, Scicchitano S. Working from home and income inequality: risks of a 'new normal' with COVID-19. *J Popul Econ*. 2021;**34**:303-360. [https://doi.org/10.1007/](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00148-020-00800-7) [s00148-020-00800-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00148-020-00800-7)
- <span id="page-20-6"></span>[83.](#page-14-1) Tomei M. Teleworking: a curse or a blessing for gender equality and work-life balance? *Inter Econ*. 2021;**56**:260-264. [https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10272-021-0995-4) [org/10.1007/s10272-021-0995-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10272-021-0995-4)
- <span id="page-20-7"></span>[84.](#page-14-2) Rodríguez-Modroño P, López-Igual P. Job quality and worklife balance of teleworkers. *Int J Environ Res Public Health*. 2021;**18:3239**. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18063239>
- <span id="page-20-9"></span>[85.](#page-14-3) Bellmann L, Hübler O. Working from home, job satisfaction and work–life balance – robust or heterogeneous links? *Int J Manpow*. 2021;**42**:424-441. <https://doi.org/10.1108/IJM-10-2019-0458>
- <span id="page-20-8"></span>[86.](#page-14-4) Wang B, Liu Y, Qian J, Parker SK. Achieving effective remote working during the COVID-19 pandemic: a work design perspective. *Appl Psychol*. 2021;**70**:16-59. [https://doi.org/10.1111/](https://doi.org/10.1111/apps.12290) [apps.12290](https://doi.org/10.1111/apps.12290)
- <span id="page-20-10"></span>[87.](#page-14-5) Althubaiti A. Information bias in health research: definition, pitfalls, and adjustment methods. *J Multidiscip Healthc*. 2016;**9**: 211-217. <https://doi.org/10.2147/jmdh.S104807>

- <span id="page-20-11"></span>[88.](#page-14-6) Paul K. Microsoft Japan tested a four-day work week and productivity jumped by 40%. *The Guardian.* November 4, 2019. [https://www.theguardian.com/](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/nov/04/microsoft-japan-four-day-work-week-productivity) technology/2019/nov/04/microsoft-japan-four-day-workweek-productivity
- <span id="page-20-12"></span>[89.](#page-15-1) Mojtahedzadeh N, Rohwer E, Lengen J, Harth V, Mache S. Health-promoting work design for telework in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Gesundheitsfördernde Arbeitsgestaltung im Homeoffice im Kontext der COVID-19-Pandemie. *Zentralbl Arbeitsmed Arbeitsschutz Ergon*. 2021;**71**:69-74. [https://doi.org/10.1007/s40664-020-00419-1.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40664-020-00419-1) Accessed October 1 2021.
- <span id="page-20-13"></span>[90.](#page-15-2) Haque A. The COVID-19 pandemic and the role of responsible leadership in health care: thinking beyond employee well-being and organisational sustainability. *Leadersh Health Serv (Bradf Engl)*. 2021;**34**:52-68. [https://doi.org/10.1108/](https://doi.org/10.1108/lhs-09-2020-0071) [lhs-09-2020-0071](https://doi.org/10.1108/lhs-09-2020-0071)
- <span id="page-20-14"></span>[91.](#page-16-0) Stansfeld SA, Fuhrer R, Shipley MJ, Marmot MG. Work characteristics predict psychiatric disorder: prospective results from the Whitehall II study. *Occup Environ Med*. 1999;**56**:302-307. [https://](https://doi.org/10.1136/oem.56.5.302) [doi.org/10.1136/oem.56.5.302](https://doi.org/10.1136/oem.56.5.302)
- <span id="page-20-15"></span>[92.](#page-16-1) Lomas N. SquadPal is a remote work app to help remote working teams gel. *Tech Crunch.* 2021. https://techcrunch.com/2021/10/01/squadpal-is-a-socialapp-to-help-remote-working-teams-gel/?guccounter= 1&guce\_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNhLw& guce\_referrer\_sig=AQAAAFyG7Mx0c9rq8x8AXrVrvY94is WnlilUu0MV2YmsTJLXrgxRb96CCwZ9r\_0Lt53l1w0SU57SnrNm r2sQihqVxkCce\_YUj5dYcwSllJmmCPHExlci\_t6axHctCbMDgnzj NWwAwmSPg5ENjf lukLmVbtT7aM-NfVihWn6aHwz-Zc7O. Accessed January 1 2022.
- <span id="page-20-16"></span>[93.](#page-16-2) Chen Z. Inf luence of working from home during the COVID-19 crisis and HR practitioner response. *Front Psychol*. 2021;**12**:710517. <https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.710517>
- <span id="page-20-17"></span>[94.](#page-16-3) Contreras F, Baykal E, Abid G. E-leadership and teleworking in times of COVID-19 and beyond: what we know and where do we go. *Front Psychol*. 2020;**11**:590271. [https://doi.org/10.3389/](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.590271) [fpsyg.2020.590271](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.590271)
- <span id="page-20-18"></span>[95.](#page-16-4) Como R, Hambley L, Domene J. An exploration of work-life wellness and remote work during and beyond COVID-19. *Canad J Career Dev*. 2021;**20**:46-56
- <span id="page-20-19"></span>[96.](#page-17-17) Raphael D. Social determinants of health: present status, unanswered questions, and future directions. *Int J Health Serv*. 2006;**36**:651-677. [https://doi.org/10.2190/3mw4-1](https://doi.org/10.2190/3mw4-1ek3-dgrq-2crf) [ek3-dgrq-2crf](https://doi.org/10.2190/3mw4-1ek3-dgrq-2crf)
- <span id="page-20-20"></span>[97.](#page-17-18) Schur LA, Ameri M, Kruse D. Telework after COVID: a "silver lining" for workers with disabilities? *J Occup Rehabil*. 2020;**30**: 521-536. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10926-020-09936-5>