## *EDITORIAL*

## Equifinality and multifinality in developmental psychopathology

## DANTE CICCHETTI AND FRED A. ROGOSCH

*Mt. Hope Family Center, University of Rochester*

Since its inception as an emergent interdisci- epigenesis, may lead to the same outcome, plinary science, diversity in process and out- Stated differently, in an open system (i.e., one come have been conceived as among the hall- where there is maintenance in change, dymarks of the developmental psychopathology namic order of processes, organization, selfperspective (Cicchetti, 1984, 1990; Gar- regulation, etc.) the same end state may be Robins & Rutter, 1990; Rutter, 1989, 1995; Bertalanffy, 1968).

Address correspondence to: Dr. Dante Cicchetti or Dr.

mezy & Streitman, 1974; Kohlberg, La- reached from a variety of different initial con-Crosse, & Riclcs, 1972; Sameroff, 1989; ditions and through different processes. This Sroufe, 1986, 1989; Sroufe & Rutter, 1984). is referred to as equifinality, an organismic Thus, developmental psychopathologists have process that possesses significant implications articulated the expectations that there are mul- for psychological and biological regulatory tiple contributors to adaptive or maladaptive systems (Cicchetti, 1996) and for behavioral outcomes in any individual, that these factors and biological plasticity (Cicchetti & Tucker, and their relative contributions vary among 1994b). In contrast, in a closed system the end individuals, and that there are myriad path- state is inextricably linked to and determined ways to any particular manifestation of adap- by the initial conditions: if either the conditive or disordered behavior (Cicchetti, 1993; tions change or the processes are modified, Richters & Cicchetti, 1993; Robins, 1966; then the end state will also be modified (von

Sroufe & Jacobvitz, 1989). Additionally, it is Initial descriptions of equifinality emabelieved that there is heterogeneity among in- nated from work in embryology. For example, dividuals who develop a specific disorder the development of a normal organism was with respect to the features of their disturb- shown to occur from a whole ovum, a divided ance, as well as among individuals who evi- ovum, or two fused ova. Further, it was demdence maladaptation but who do not develop onstrated that different initial sizes and differa disorder. In accord with this view, the prin- ent courses of growth can eventuate in the ciples of equifinality and multifinality derived same ultimate size of an organism (von Bertafrom general systems theory (von Bertalanffy, lanffy, 1968; Waddington, 1957). Within the 1968) are germane. discipline of developmental psychopathology, Equifinality refers to the observation that equifinality has been invoked to explain why in any open system (cf. Mayr, 1964, 1988) a a variety of developmental pathways may diversity of pathways, including chance eventuate in a given outcome, rather than exevents or what biologists refer to as nonlinear pecting a singular primary pathway to the adaptive or maladaptive outcome.

 Th e Principle of multifinality (Wilden, Fred A. Rogosch, Mt. Hope Family Center, Univ. of 1980) suggests that any one component may Rochester, 187 Edinburgh St., Rochester, NY 14608. function differently depending on the organi-

of personality functioning and coping dimen- (Sroufe & Rutter, 1984, p. 18). sions. Psychological and biological processes In this Special Issue variable-oriented and

zation of the system in which it operates, tributing to divergence in outcomes given Multifinality states that the effect on function- common origins. In many respects, the strateing of any one component's value may vary gies needed to achieve these goals run counter in different systems. Actual effects will de- to prevailing variable-oriented strategies that pend on the conditions set by the values of strive to identify the primary or major causal additional components with which it is struc- agents involved in understanding the etiology turally linked. Consequently, the pathology or of psychopathological conditions. Such vanhealth of a system must be identified in terms able-oriented approaches are important for of how adequately its essential functions are understanding the average or most expected maintained. Stated differently, a particular ad- outcomes and various component processes verse event should not necessarily be seen as that contribute to those outcomes on a group leading to the same psychopathological or non- level. These types of analyses may be thought psychopathological outcome in every individ- of as a first generation approach that estabual. Likewise, individuals may begin on the lishes important relations among variables same major pathway and, as a function of their that are prominent in populations. In some arsubsequent "choices," exhibit very different eas of inquiry (e.g., conduct disorder, deprespatterns of adaptation or maladaptation (Cic- sion) a substantial knowledge base has been chetti & Tucker, 1994a; Rutter, 1989; Sroufe, accrued in this manner. In contrast, a path-1989; Sroufe, Egeland, & Kreutzer, 1990). ways approach builds upon knowledge gained The collection of papers in this Special Is- from variable-oriented studies; however, atsue represents a diversity of approaches to tention is shifted to exploring the common studying pathways conceptualizations in de- and the uncommon outcomes, as well as altervelopmental psychopathology. Many of the nate routes by which outcomes are achieved papers involve the presentation of longitudi- by different individuals (cf. Cicchetti & nal data to delineate various patterns of func- Schneider-Rosen, 1986). Thus, what might be tioning over time and differential processes considered error variance at the group level contributing to outcomes. Developmental pe- must be critically examined for understanding riods ranging from infancy to very old age are diversity in process and outcome. This more examined, and a plethora of types of psycho- person-oriented level of analysis of a differenpathological outcomes, including early dis- tial pathways approach is vital for achieving ruptive behavior, conduct disorder and antiso- a primary mission of developmental psychociality, depressive and anxiety disorders, pathology, implied in its definition as ".. . substance and alcohol disorders, and schizo- the study of the origins and course of *individ*phrenia are investigated, as well as a variety *ual* patterns of behavioral maladaptation ... "

and their interplay in development are eluci- person-oriented analyses are presented, with dated to provide integrative conceptualiza- some papers incorporating both types of pertions of the developmental course. spectives. In several behavior-genetic investi-Beyond this broad scope of populations, gations, twin study methodologies are used to developmental periods, psychopathologies, obtain population-level estimates of the conand contributory processes, the papers in this unbuttons of genetic and environmental Special Issue share a number of important sources of influence. Pathways thinking has commonalities. In examining developmental stimulated researchers in this area to begin to pathways, the contributors were asked to ad- ask how these types of analyses can impart dress how their work could be used to illus- knowledge of development at the individual trate issues of equifinality and/or multifinality level. In many of the papers in this Special in their respective papers. Thus, the goal of Issue, attention to homogeneous subgroups is the contributors was to examine diversity in utilized as a critical strategy for elucidating origins and processes leading to common out- diversity in process and outcome. The empha\* comes, as well as to elucidate processes con- sis on subgroup analysis highlights the transition from a focus on variables to a focus on This attention to diversity in origins, proindividuals, and this transition is essential for cesses, and outcomes in understanding develdemonstrating equifinality and multifinality in opmental pathways does not suggest that prethe developmental course. The examination of diction is futile as a result of the many patterns of commonality within relatively ho- potential individual patterns of adaptation mogeneous subgroups of individuals and con- (Sroufe, 1989). There are constraints on how comitant similarity in profiles of contributory much diversity is possible, and not all outprocesses becomes an important data analytic comes are equally likely (Cicchetti & Tucker, strategy. Moreover, the need to examine the 1994a; Sroufe et al., 1990). Nonetheless, the totality of attributes, psychopathological con- appreciation of equifinality and multifinality ditions, and risk and protective processes in in development encourages theorists and rethe context of each other rather than in isola- searchers to entertain more complex and vartion is seen as crucial for understanding the ied approaches to how they conceptualize and course of development taken by individuals, investigate development and psychopathol-For example, the presence of a childhood de- ogy. We believe that the papers in this Special pressive disorder has different developmental Issue will stimulate researchers to move beimplications depending on whether it occurs yond the use of equifinality and multifinality alone or in conjunction with conduct disorder, in post hoc discussions of their findings. Re-Similarly, the nature of alcoholism varies con- searchers should increasingly strive to demriences, and the developmental history of the realized, individual.

siderably depending on differences in the life onstrate the multiplicity of processes and course of antisociality. Xnus> this orientation outcomes that may be articulated at the indihighlights the importance of an organizational vidual, person-oriented level within existing view of development (cf. Cicchetti, 1993; longitudinal data sets. Ultimately, future en-Cicchetti & Sroufe, 1978; Sroufe et al., 1990; deavors must conceptualize and design re-Waters & Sroufe, 1983). The meaning of any search at the outset with these differential one attribute, process, or psychopathological pathways concepts as a foundation. In so docondition needs to be considered in light of ing, progress toward achieving the unique the complex matrix of individual characteris- goals of developmental psychopathology to tics, experiences, and social-contextual influ- explain the development of individual patences involved, the timing of events and expe- terns of adaptation and maladaptation will be

## References

Cicchetti, D. (1984). The emergence of developmental syndrome infants. In M. Lewis & L. Rosenblum

Cicchetti, D. (1990). An historical perspective on the dis- New York: Plenum Press. traub (Eds.), *Risk and protective factors in the devel- and Psychopathology, 6,* 533-549. *opment of psychopathology* (pp. 2-28). New York: Cicchetti, D., & Tucker, D. (Eds.). (1994b). Special issue:

Reactions, reflections, projections. *Developmental* 814.

*people, clinical and developmental perspectives* (pp. *phrenia Bulletin, 8,* 14-90.

view of affect: Illustration from the study of Down's 934-941.

psychopathology. *Child Development, 55,* 1-7. (Eds.), *The Development of Affect* (pp. 309-350).

cipline of developmental psychopathology. In J. Rolf, Cicchetti, D., & Tucker, D. (1994a). Development and A. Masten, D. Cicchetti, K. Neuchterlein, & S. Wein- self-regulatory structures of the mind. *Development*

Cambridge University Press. Neural plasticity, sensitive periods, and psychopathol-Cicchetti, D. (1993). Developmental psychopathology: ogy. *Development and Psychopathology,* 6(4), 531-

*Review, 13,* 471-502. Kohlberg, L., LaCrosse, J., & Ricks, D. (1972). The pre-Cicchetti, D. (Ed.). (1996). Special issue: Regulatory pro- disability of adult mental health from childhood becesses. *Development and Psychopathology, 8(1),* 1- havior, In B. Wolman (Ed.), *Manual of Child Psycho-*305. *pathology* (pp. 1217-1284). New York: McGraw-Hill.

Cicchetti, D., & Schneider-Rosen, K. (1986). An organi- Garmezy, N., & Streitman, S. (1974). Children at risk: zational approach to childhood depression. In M. Rut- The search for antecedents to schizophrenia. Part I: ter, C. Izard, & P. Read (Eds.), *Depression in young* Conceptual models and research methods. *Schizo-*

71-134). New York: Guilford. Mayr, E. (1964). The evolution of living systems. *Pro-*Cicchetti, D., & Sroufe, L. A. (1978). An organizational *ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 51,*

- Mayr. E. (1988). *Toward a new philosophy of biology.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Richters, J. E., & Cicchetti, D. (1993). Mark Twain meets DSM-III-R: Conduct disorder, development, and the concept of harmful dysfunction. *Development and Psychopathology, 5,* 5-29.
- Robins, L. (1966). *Deviant children grown up.* Baltimore: Williams & Williams.
- Robins, L, & Rutter, M. (Eds.). (1990). *Straight and devious pathways from childhood to adulthood.* New York: Cambridge University Press.
- Rutter, M. (1989). Pathways from childhood to adult life. *Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 30,* 23-51.
- Rutter, M. (1995). Relationships between mental disorders in childhood and adulthood. *Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 91,* 73-85.
- Sameroff, A. (1989). Models of developmental regulation: The environtype. In D. Cicchetti (Ed.). *The emergence of discipline, Rochester symposium on developmental psychopathology* (Vol. 1, pp. 41-68). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
- Sroufe, L. A. (1986). Bowlby's contribution to psychoanalytic theory and developmental psychology; Attachment: Separation: Loss. *Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 27,* 841-849.

- Sroufe, L. A. (1989). Psychopathology as developmental deviation. In D. Cicchetti (Ed.). *Rttchester symposium on developmental psychopathology. Vol. I: Tlie Emergence of a discipline* (pp. 15-40). Hillsdale. NJ: Erlbaum.
- Sroufe. L. A.. Egeland. B., & Krcutzer. T. (1990). The fate of early experience following developmental change: Longitudinal approaches to individual adaptation in childhood. *Child Development. 61,* 1363- 1373.
- Sroufe. L. A.. & Jacobvitz, D. (1989). Diverging pathways, developmental transfonnations, multiple etiologies and the problem of continuity in development. *Human Development, 32.* 196-203.
- Sroufe. L. A.. & Rutter. M. (1984). The domain of developmental psychopathology. *Child Development. 55.* 17-29.
- von Bertalanffy, L. (1968). *General system theory.* New York: Braziller.
- Waddington. C. H. (1957). *Tlie strategy of genes.* London: Allen and Unwin.
- Waters, E. & Sroufe. L A. (1983). Competence as a developmental construct. *Developmental Review, 3,* 79-97.
- Wilden. A. (1980). *System am! structure.* London: Tavis- tock.