### The International Journal of Human Resource Management

ISSN: 0958-5192 (Print) 1466-4399 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rijh20

## The paradox of employee psychological well-being practices: an integrative literature review and new directions for research

Mark Loon, Lilian Otaye-Ebede & Jim Stewart

**To cite this article:** Mark Loon, Lilian Otaye-Ebede & Jim Stewart (2019) The paradox of employee psychological well-being practices: an integrative literature review and new directions for research, The International Journal of Human Resource Management, 30:1, 156-187, DOI: 10.1080/09585192.2018.1479877

To link to this article: <a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2018.1479877">https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2018.1479877</a>

## The paradox of employee psychological well-being practices: an integrative literature review and new directions for research

Mark Loon<sup>a</sup>, Lilian Otaye-Ebede<sup>b</sup> D and Jim Stewart<sup>b</sup>

<span id="page-1-1"></span><span id="page-1-0"></span><sup>a</sup>Bath Business School and the College of Liberal Arts, Bath Spa University, Bath, UK; <sup>b</sup>Liverpool Business School, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, UK

#### ABSTRACT

It is well established that many HR practices aimed at increasing employees' psychological wellbeing (PWB) and organisational performance conflict and even contradict one another. We address this long-standing issue by undertaking an innovative integrative literature review using the paradox metatheory as a lens. Unlike the contingency approach, a paradox perspective deems real-world tensions as normal, which can also be harnessed, and benefit employees and the organisation. We make three contributions; firstly, we identify contradictory employee PWB and organisational performance HR practices; secondly, we offer a solution in addressing the inherent tension between PWB and organisational performance by developing a new sensemaking conceptual framework; and thirdly, we offer a more nuanced perspective of prevailing arguments by distinguishing endogenous factors that organisations can influence to enhance the synergies between employee PWB and organisational performance HR practices. The intended impact of this paper is to instigate a paradigm shift and shape a new trajectory of thinking about how employee PWB and organisational performance practices can exist side-by-side.

#### **KEYWORDS**

<span id="page-1-2"></span>Psychological wellbeing; performance; HR practices; paradox; metatheory

#### Introduction

Employee-centred HR practices, in particular those targeting an increase in their wellbeing, have gained much interest from scholars and practitioners, especially given their claimed benefits to both staff and the organisation (Guest, 1999). Traditionally, researchers have focused on three dimensions of employee wellbeing; physiological, psychological and social. We argue that the psychological dimension of the above construct is paramount, given the important and central role of mental processes such as perception, as identified by Chu, Thorne, and

<span id="page-2-8"></span><span id="page-2-6"></span><span id="page-2-4"></span>Guite (2004), that can ultimately impact on organisational outcomes (Danna & Griffin, 1999; Hardy, Woods, & Wall, 2003). For example, psychological distress can lead to physical exhaustion and social withdrawal from peers.

<span id="page-2-9"></span><span id="page-2-5"></span><span id="page-2-3"></span><span id="page-2-0"></span>Research has also demonstrated that HRM practices broadly lead to positive organisational outcomes (Jackson, Schuler, & Jiang, 2014). However, scholars have recognised the competing, and at times even conflicting, nature of HR practices in supporting both PWB and organisational performance. For example, an emphasis on organisational performance through high-performance work systems (HPWS) (Aryee, Walumbwa, Seidu, & Otaye, 2012) leads to work intensification (Combs, Liu, Hall, & Ketchen, 2006). Similarly, organisational change involving the use of provisional practices (Brown, Ainsworth, & Grant, 2012) – such as the creation of project teams within matrix structures (for enacting change and for businessas-usual purposes) – can create role ambiguity (e.g. is the project or business-asusual role a priority?). Organisational growth through performance may also lead to employee-versus-organisation tensions. For example, the introduction of HR practices such as pay-for-performance can lead to adverse effects on employee PWB (S. Park & Sturman, 2016) through increased feelings of rivalry and conflict among colleagues, and anxiety due to the lack of security in remuneration. Given the potential tensions between employee- vs organisational-centric HR practices, it is important to explore and identify employee PWB practices that complement and compete with practices that support organisational performance. This in turn requires a fresh approach in helping HR professionals through this potentially confounding area of practice.

<span id="page-2-10"></span><span id="page-2-2"></span>Therefore, the aim of this study is to synthesise existing literature on the paradoxical challenges posed by tensions that exist between employee PWB and organisational performance practices. This paper builds upon extant studies that have debated the balance between wellbeing and performance, and provides a synthesis between how each individual factor has influenced these debates. For example, Brown, Metz, Cregan, and Kulik's (2009) study discusses the tensions between the HR roles of an 'employee champion' (for general employee wellbeing) and 'strategic partner' (for organisational performance), while Francis and Keegan's (2006) similar study focuses on the priorities of HR roles in relation to wellbeing and performance. While indebted to both approaches, this study's main point of departure lies in its focus on HR practices, rather than HR roles as of interest to Brown et al. and Francis and Keegan.

<span id="page-2-7"></span><span id="page-2-1"></span>Boselie, Brewster, and Paauwe (2009) provide a useful historical analysis of dualities in HR, in which they offer a range of different frameworks, e.g. institutional theory, as a lens in addressing challenges arising from tensions between PWB and organisational performance. Our study builds upon the work of Boselie et al. (2009) by arguing that paradox may be a more useful lens. Consequently, a paradox metatheory will be used to interrogate and integrate literature, and to differentiate between employee PWB practices that complement or compete with practices supporting organisational performance. The paradox metatheory is an

<span id="page-3-7"></span>appropriate lens, as scholars such as Smith and Lewis (2011) argue that paradoxes render the dominant management model of the contingency approach inadequate, because management are required to address opposites simultaneously, so circumventing the need to choose one over the other or make trade-offs. Unlike the contingency approach, a paradox perspective views tensions as normal, which can be harnessed, and benefit employees and the organisation (Smith & Lewis, 2011).

This study makes three important contributions. Firstly, our study is the first to adopt a paradox lens to examine the tensions between PWB and performancefocused HR practices. The paradox lens has enabled us to comprehensively identify from extant research and literature, employee PWB and organisationalperformance HR practices that are contradictory with one another. Our second contribution is in addressing the inherent tension between PWB and performance as we develop a new sensemaking conceptual framework that demonstrates how the PWB/performance paradox can be addressed. The intention of this contribution is to instigate a paradigm shift and shape a new trajectory of thinking about how employee PWB and organisational performance practices can exist side-by-side. Finally, we build upon the work of Guest (2017), who adopted a symbiotic view of PWB practices with organisational performance. Specifically, he argued that the two should not pose a dilemma; as the adoption of PWB practices ultimately contribute to organisational performance. We adopt a more nuanced view, as we contend that such opportunities for synergy are context-dependent. For example, new firms can build-in employee PWB into firm performance practices early on, thereby imprinting and coalescing their PWB practices with organisational performance, and setting a strong precedent for future reference (Marquis & Tilcsik, 2013).

<span id="page-3-2"></span><span id="page-3-0"></span>The next section is a literature review on the paradox metatheory. It also includes a review of extant research on the psychological dimension of wellbeing. This is followed by a discussion on the methodology employed in this integrated literature review. The findings of the review are then presented. A discussion follows that includes the development of a conceptual framework. Finally, emerging issues within this area are highlighted and directions for future research are outlined.

#### **Underpinning theory and literature review**

#### **Paradoxes**

<span id="page-3-6"></span><span id="page-3-5"></span><span id="page-3-4"></span><span id="page-3-3"></span><span id="page-3-1"></span>Schad, Lewis, Raisch, and Smith (2016) define paradox as, persistent contradiction between interdependent elements (p. 10). It is one of many related forms of organisational tensions, including dilemmas (McGrath, 1982), dualities (Smith & Graetz, 2006) and dialectics (Seo & Creed, 2002). Paradoxes are both inherent and socially constructed (Luscher & Lewis, 2008). Paradox is inherent due to the intrinsic nature of some systems – e.g. equality versus equitability – and is also socially constructed due to institutional actors' choice of cognitive frames,

<span id="page-4-1"></span><span id="page-4-0"></span>dialogical mixed messages (Argyris, 1988) and 'functional stupidity' as a consequence of a lack of reflexivity (Alvesson and Spicer (2012).

<span id="page-4-9"></span>While organisational tensions are ubiquitous, many are latent (Luscher & Lewis, 2008). However, as change intensifies, such as in today's environment, these dormant tensions start to manifest and organisations begin to face many paradoxical challenges. The multiplicity of enterprise goals inherently invites tension, as organisations strive to address competing and even opposing needs of stakeholders (Scherer, Palazzo, & Seidl, 2013). In addition, the need to 'do more with less' becomes proverbial, as scarcity is fueled by the need to satisfy multiple goals. Change, plurality and scarcity are potent alchemy that promotes paradoxes such as: cooperate and compete (Chung & Beamish, 2010); explore and exploit (Smith, Binns, & Tushman, 2010); and learn and perform (Dobrow, Smith, & Posner, 2011).

<span id="page-4-11"></span><span id="page-4-10"></span><span id="page-4-3"></span><span id="page-4-2"></span>If paradoxes are not attended to, ambivalence, conflict, chaos and collapse ensue (Schad et al., 2016). Finding a balanced approach is key, as Sundaramurthy and Lewis (2003) argue: Stressing one polarity exacerbates the need for the other, often sparking defenses, impeding learning, and engendering counter-productive reinforcing cycles (p. 397). Although the dominant contingency approach offers one response to tensions, it is inherently about organisational choices, which may not be genuinely available when confronted with paradoxes and dualities (Smith & Lewis, 2011). The paradox perspective is about attending to all competing demands at the same time; it views tensions as normal, and they can be functionally exploited (Smith & Lewis, 2011).

#### Metatheory

<span id="page-4-12"></span><span id="page-4-8"></span><span id="page-4-7"></span><span id="page-4-5"></span><span id="page-4-4"></span>Tsoukas (1994) proposed that a metatheory is a theory of theories, while Ritzer (1990) states that a metatheory is an overarching theoretical perspective (p. 3), which is similar to Lewis and Smith's (2014) construal of metatheory as a 'theoretical framework'. Qiu, Donaldson, and Luo (2012) suggest that a metatheory is a paradigm, with Hesketh and Fleetwood (2006) arguing that a metatheory is an overriding assumption and that all theory employs metatheory. Tsoukas (1994) contends that a metatheory is particularly useful when there are no acceptable theories of a phenomenon. He further contended that a metatheory can be used as an organising instrument that (i) guides the identification of ontological and epistemological principles of a phenomenon, which then ii) bring together divergent perspectives of a phenomenon, premised upon various applications. He argues that undertaking the two steps should elucidate the nature of a phenomenon by revealing the relationship between the various perspectives and the scope of its applications.

<span id="page-4-6"></span>The metatheory approach has been used in a number of fields within management and organisation studies. For example, Poole and Van de Ven (1989) attempted to develop a metatheory of innovation, while Hesketh and Fleetwood

<span id="page-5-4"></span><span id="page-5-0"></span>(2006) adopted critical realism as a metatheory in examining the link between HRM and performance. In addition, Jarvensivu and Moller (2009) applied a metatheory of inter-organisational network management, while Chao and Moon (2005) used chaos, complexity, and network theories in building a metatheory to understand the complexity of culture from the perspective of a cultural mosaic.

#### Paradox as a metatheory

<span id="page-5-1"></span>Metatheories are effective in helping move beyond an 'either/or' polarisation (Tsoukas, 1994). Schad et al. (2016) argue that the plurality and multiplicity in the application of paradox renders it as a metatheory. For example, paradox has been used as a tool for theorising, e.g. Dameron and Torset (2014). Others have used paradox as a lens to study relationships in phenomena e.g. Hahn, Preuss, Pinkse, and Figge (2014), with some framing paradox as theory, e.g. Smith and Lewis (2011).

<span id="page-5-3"></span>Schad et al. (2016) claim that paradox as a metatheory offers a powerful lens as an explanandum of tensions, which are ubiquitous in organisations. Lewis and Smith (2014) support this view, as a metatheory lens uses the principles of paradox in bridging multiple constructs, theories, context and methodologies. They argue that ... metatheory is unconstrained by particular contexts, variables or methods, rather delineating core elements, such as underlying assumptions and central concepts, for a scholarly community (p. 129). A paradox metatheory is appropriate here, given the complexities that are inherent in the relationship between employees' PWB and organisational performance. Such a claim is supported by scholars such as Tsoukas (2017), who argue that the 'complexification' of theory is needed to reflect the complexities in reality.

#### <span id="page-5-9"></span>HR practices: psychological wellbeing

<span id="page-5-10"></span><span id="page-5-8"></span><span id="page-5-7"></span><span id="page-5-6"></span><span id="page-5-5"></span><span id="page-5-2"></span>Employee PWB is a multi-dimensional construct that has been conceptualised in various ways by scholars. For example, Ryff (1995) defines it as a representation of wellness, which is conceived as progressions of continued growth across the life course (p. 99). Schmutte and Ryff (1997) define it as a general feeling of happiness (p. 551). Similarly, Panaccio and Vandenberghe (2009) conceptualise PWB as being characterised by the presence of positive affect, the absence of negative affect and the joint presence of job and life satisfaction. On the other hand, Warr (1990) operationalised PWB along the following three dimensions: satisfaction-dissatisfaction, enthusiasm-depression and comfort-anxiety. According to Diener and Suh (1997), PWB may appear in the form of thoughts or in the form of affect. This is consistent with Ryff and colleagues' model of PWB that encompasses six dimensions; self-acceptance, personal growth, purpose in life, positive relations with others, environment mastery, and autonomy (Ryff, 1989a, 1989b; Ryff & Keyes, 1995). In considering PWB, a distinction is often made between hedonic

<span id="page-6-8"></span>(positive emotions) and eudemonic (positive functioning) wellbeing (Guest, 2017). Hedonic wellbeing is typically represented by life/job satisfaction and is seen as driven by the need for rewards/pleasure and the avoidance of negative experiences as found in the work of Ryan and Deci (2001). On the other hand, eudemonic wellbeing provides the opportunity for self-expression and is derived from the assessment that one's life situation is meaningful as found in the work of Ryff and Keyes (1995).

<span id="page-6-9"></span><span id="page-6-7"></span><span id="page-6-4"></span>Scholars have found PWB to relate with a number of outcomes. For example, Cartwright and Cooper (2008) argued that people with higher levels of PWB at work are healthier, have happier lives and live longer. In their field of study, Wright and Cropanzano (2000) demonstrated that there was a positive relationship between PWB and job performance. Similar findings were reported by Robertson, Birch, and Cooper (2012), where PWB was found to have incremental value over and above that of positive job and work attitudes in predicting self-reported levels of performance. Antecedents of PWB have also been examined by scholars, some of which include: transformational leadership e.g. Arnold (2017); authentic leadership and attachment insecurity e.g. Rahimnia and Sharifirad (2015); perceived organisational support e.g. Panaccio and Vandenberghe (2009); meaningful work and perspective taking e.g. Arnold and Walsh (2015); employee perception of HR practices e.g. Baluch (2017); emotional intelligence e.g. Carmeli, Yitzhak-Halevy, and Weisberg (2009); and HPWS e.g. Heffernan and Dundon (2016).

<span id="page-6-6"></span><span id="page-6-5"></span><span id="page-6-3"></span><span id="page-6-2"></span><span id="page-6-1"></span><span id="page-6-0"></span>These results reflect the increasing interest in PWB in scholarly research. Recent arguments suggest that, given changes in working conditions such as the influx of information technology, financial unsettlement, economic, political and global upheavals etc., in order for organisations to increase their performance, they first have to take into consideration their employee wellbeing (c.f. Guest, 2017). Employers have therefore focused on implementing practices that could foster employee PWB. These practices, mainly within the remit of HR management, often pose paradoxical challenges to the organisation because of the contradictions that exist between those that positively influence PWB and those that focus on increasing organisational performance at the expense of PWB. Therefore, building on the work of Guest (2017) and as noted above, we aim to interrogate and synthesise literature to differentiate between HR employee PWB practices that complement or compete with practices supporting organisational performance and change using the paradox metatheory lens.

#### HR practices: high performance

While there is a claimed link between HR practices promoting PWB and its positive impact on organisation performance, there is a separate and distinct thread of research within what is referred to as Strategic HRM, which focuses on utilising HR practices to improve organisation performance (Combs et al., 2006). These performance-focused HR practices have been coined under various terminologies

such as HPWS, high involvement management (HIM), and high commitment management (HCM), with scholars mostly examining relationships between what are referred to as HPWS and organisational outcomes (Kinnie, Swart, & Purcell, 2005). HPWS research pays little attention to potential effects of identified practices on individual employees, including their PWB (Guest, 2017).

<span id="page-7-0"></span>Organisational outcomes associated with HPWS include: increased job satisfaction; lower employee turnover; higher productivity; better decision-making; increased efficiency; and greater flexibility. These outcomes all help improve organisational performance (Combs et al., 2006). The main HR practices associated with HPWS include: training and development; incentive compensation; selection; employee participation: and flexible work arrangements (Combs et al., 2006). Each of these outcomes has some potential for impacting PWB either positively, negatively, or both. For example, employee participation can have a positive impact on PWB. However, the effects may vary across different occupational groups (Kinnie et al., 2005), with members of some groups experiencing participation as empowering, while others experience anxiety. It is reasonable to assume that there will also be individual differences within occupational groups. Similarly, incentive compensation may be experienced as both positive and negative by different groups and individuals. Negative experience of incentive compensation is likely to lead to anxiety and have a negative impact on PWB. It is therefore clear that HR practices associated with HPWS may be detrimental to employees' PWB and, through that effect, have negative consequences for organisation performance.

#### <span id="page-7-1"></span>Methodology

<span id="page-7-2"></span>We used two of the most commonly used databases in management studies; Scopus and Web of Science (Klang, Wallnöfer, & Hacklin, 2014). The search process first involved the primary topic of the study, using the Boolean terms 'health' OR 'well-being'. Using the databases' inbuilt filters, we then limited the articles to those in English in the field of psychology and business management. By selecting only journal articles we adopted the viewpoint of Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Bacharach, and Podsakoff (2005), who argued that such periodicals represent validated knowledge. We then progressively searched within each return set with the Boolean terms 'Employee' OR 'Workplace', followed by 'Organi\*ational Performance' and 'Human Resource \*', using wildcards to broaden the search. Scopus had 106 returns, while Web of Science recorded 54. Sixty-eight articles were used for the study. Table 1 shows the steps taken in the literature search and selection process.

To ensure that the articles were relevant and contributed to the attainment of the study's aim, we screened the articles for relevance and suitability. For example, articles were excluded for five primary reasons: (i) themes involved examining HR practices in improving organisational performance in healthcare organisations;

<span id="page-8-0"></span>**Table 1.** Literature search and screening steps.

|                                                                                    | Database  |                |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|----------------|
| Steps                                                                              | Scopus    | Web of Science |
| Terms used: health or wellbeing                                                    | 3,858,734 | 1,557,881      |
| Limit to fields: psychology and business management, and english and articles only | 217,234   | 34,744         |
| Terms used: employee or workplace                                                  | 18,507    | 30,092         |
| Term used to search within previous search result set 'Organi*ational Performance' | 778       | 139            |
| Term used to search within previous search result set: 'Human Resource *'          | 106       | 54             |
| Merged set                                                                         | 160       |                |
| Duplicates removed                                                                 | 140       |                |
| Review of abstracts to determine relevance of articles                             | 93        |                |
| Final number of articles used in analysis                                          | 68        |                |

<span id="page-8-1"></span>Table 2. Type of paper reviewed.

| Field of study    |              | % of 68 articles |
|-------------------|--------------|------------------|
| Empirical         | Quantitative | 67.6             |
| ·                 | Qualitative  | 2.9              |
|                   | Multi-method | 4.4              |
| Conceptual/review |              | 17               |
| Total             |              | 100%             |

(ii) focus on PWB with cursory or no mention of HR practices; (iii) focus on HR practices with little or no relevance to PWB; or, in relation to performance: (iv) articles emphasised related constructs e.g. organisational commitment, but with only cursory reference to PWB; and (v) articles focused on detriments on employee PWB in the context of personality and personal factors e.g. ethnicities. Table 2 shows that most of the papers reviewed were quantitative studies.

The articles were reviewed and evaluated using the paradox metatheory lens. While an analytical framework was developed prior to the analysis, we adopted a reflexive approach and adapted the framework to fit with the data as new perspectives emerged. The synthesis that then follows from the literature review offers a new conceptual framework (Torraco, 2016) and perspective of employee PWB and organisational performance practices.

#### <span id="page-8-2"></span>**Findings**

The findings are organised into four parts. The first highlights the variability in the conceptualisation of employee PWB. The second identifies the PWB practices that are paradoxical to organisational performance, while the third highlights the 'mutual-gains' PWB practices with organisational performance i.e. a 'win-win' scenario. Finally, the fourth outlines the contexts for the mutual-gains model of PWB practices on organisational performance.

#### **Conceptualising employee PWB**

<span id="page-9-13"></span><span id="page-9-11"></span><span id="page-9-9"></span><span id="page-9-7"></span><span id="page-9-5"></span><span id="page-9-4"></span><span id="page-9-1"></span>Our analysis of the literature revealed that authors conceptualised PWB broadly, including elements such as: job satisfaction, e.g. Boxall and Macky (2014); diversity management e.g. Guillaume, Dawson, Otave-Ebede, Woods, and West (2017): happiness and job involvement e.g. Huang, Ahlstrom, Lee, Chen, and Hsieh (2016); as the inverse of emotional exhaustion e.g. Shantz, Arevshatian, Alfes, and Bailey (2016); as a degree of depressiveness e.g. Stengård, Bernhard-Oettel, Näswall, Ishäll, and Berntson (2015); as the inverse of burnout e.g. van Mierlo, Rutte, Vermunt, Kompier, and Doorewaard (2006); and as within the continuum anxiety-contentment e.g. Wood and de Menezes (2011). Given the broad conceptualisation of PWB, many HR practices can be construed as directly or indirectly supporting employee PWB. For example, although 'challenging jobs' is usually part of performance-enhancing initiatives, it may be conceived as an employee PWB practice in enhancing job satisfaction, although challenging job assignments in turn may also be perceived as stressful and cause self-doubt (Šarotar Žižek, Treven, & Čančer, 2015). Some jobs are inherently stressful: for instance, customer-facing staff, performing emotional labour can experience distress, as they feel estranged from their true self (Sloan, 2008).

#### <span id="page-9-10"></span><span id="page-9-8"></span>**Paradoxical PWB practices**

<span id="page-9-14"></span><span id="page-9-12"></span><span id="page-9-6"></span><span id="page-9-3"></span><span id="page-9-2"></span><span id="page-9-0"></span>Some authors found that, although HPWS may instigate higher levels of employee satisfaction and greater intrinsic rewards from their work, employees, at the same time, may experience greater anxiety and more intense work rhythms, increased workloads and strains that ultimately act as a barrier to high performance (Decramer et al., 2015; Van De Voorde & Beijer, 2015). An unintended consequence of the introduction and on-going demands of high involvement management (HIM) - which rather than create an increased sense of coherence or a feeling of being valued by the organisation (therefore increasing PWB) (Wood & de Menezes, 2011) - instead led workers to question the organisation's valuation of staff and the comprehensibility and meaningfulness of what surrounds them (Wood, Van Veldhoven, Croon, & de Menezes, 2012). Our research shows a nuanced picture, in that performance-related practices involving enriched jobs can be complementary with employee PWB, but at the same time their performance-related practices, i.e. HIM, are counter-effective to employee PWB (Fan et al., 2014). Such inconsistent results extend to the practice of performance appraisal, as it can be either motivating or demotivating. Its effectiveness is highly contextual, and dependent on how it is designed and implemented e.g. de Koeijer, Paauwe, and Huijsman (2014). Additionally, participative management has been shown to be negatively associated with employee social wellbeing (Boreham, Povey, & Tomaszewski, 2016), while, remarkably, empowering leadership practices have

<span id="page-10-12"></span><span id="page-10-11"></span><span id="page-10-9"></span><span id="page-10-8"></span><span id="page-10-5"></span><span id="page-10-3"></span>no significant impact on PWB (J. G. Park, Kim, Yoon, & Joo, 2017) (see Appendix for summary of findings).

Job resources, e.g. autonomy and discretion, are paradoxical with high efficiency practices and business models such as just-in-time (JIT) and total quality management (TQM), as they may impede productivity (Schabracq & Cooper, 1997). Other practices, such as quantitative flexibility, which is generally advantageous for organisations, is detrimental to employees in terms of job security (Schabracq & Cooper, 1997). Although it is not surprising that practices that support work systems, such as lean, may enhance organisational performance but may be detrimental to employees' PWB e.g. Townsend and Wilkinson (2010), it is nonetheless counter intuitive that enhancing employees' job resources to enable them to better cope with such work systems can also lead to employee psychological detriment. There are elements in job design to build-in autonomy to enhance PWB (Park & Searcy, 2012), such as flexible working arrangements (FWA). FWA not only increases job autonomy, but it can also increases work life balance (WLB) (Rudolph & Baltes, 2017) and therefore PWB (Boreham et al., 2016). However, other research revealed that FWA could lead to insecurity (Lange, 2013), with some scholars identifying more nuanced relationship necessitating FWA/WLB practices that need to be coupled with effective team design in order to be effective (Liu & Wang, 2011). Figure 1 illustrates the paradoxical PWB practices with practices supporting organisational performance.

<span id="page-10-10"></span><span id="page-10-7"></span><span id="page-10-6"></span><span id="page-10-0"></span>Other PWB practices that may have a counter impact are employee communication practices enabling participation and involvement. The positive impact of such practices is limited as, through the passage of time, staff may feel the practices become invasive and stressful (Cañibano, 2013). The need to accommodate 'more' communication may also impede the speed of decision-making (Boxall & Macky, 2010). Further PWB practices aimed at enhancing collegial relationships with co-workers can be undermined by a competitive organisational climate being supported by individual-based competitive reward schemes (Reio & Ghosh, 2009), which confuses staff at best and causes frustration, and withdrawal of extra-role behaviours at worst. The impact of some PWB practices may need further research, as some practices do not result in the envisaged impact e.g. health and wellness practices on mitigating turnover (Caillier, 2016) or enhancing WLB (Bui, Liu, & Footner, 2016).

#### <span id="page-10-2"></span><span id="page-10-1"></span>Mutual gains PWB-performance practices

<span id="page-10-4"></span>Our literature review also shows practices that generally provide a win-win scenario for employee PWB and organisational performance. Learning and development (L&D) practices tend to have an overall positive impact (Reio & Ghosh, 2009), especially if they cater for employees' professional and personal development (Kira & Balkin, 2014). While most L&D practices are directed at maximising employees' abilities (e.g. talent management) to increase job involvement and

<span id="page-11-0"></span>Figure 1. Illustration of the paradox between HR PWB and HR performance-orientated practices.

<span id="page-11-2"></span><span id="page-11-1"></span>ultimately performance (Spreitzer, Sutcliffe, Dutton, Sonenshein, & Grant, 2005), such practices can also help improve performance by enabling employees to better cope with stress, such as enhancing emotional intelligence e.g. (Karimi, Cheng, Bartram, Leggat, & Sarkeshik, 2015), while van Mierlo et al. (2006) found that practices that stimulate learning mitigate the effects of work intensification. L&D practices that stimulate individuals through task design can reduce emotional exhaustion and thereby increase PWB (Rudolph & Baltes, 2017).

Other 'functional' HR practices include: recruitment and selection, which involves hiring staff with spiritual vitality and ethical character; tailoring <span id="page-12-10"></span><span id="page-12-9"></span><span id="page-12-6"></span><span id="page-12-0"></span>compensation and benefits packages to provide equitable pay scales (Wright, 2010); and widening and improving employee engagement and voice practices to understand employees' PWB needs, as well as to convey organisational performance requirements that ultimately allow the discovery of mutual gains thresholds e.g. Conway, Fu, Monks, Alfes, and Bailey (2016). PWB schemes, including occupational health and safety, such as counselling to improve PWB, can reduce absenteeism and therefore improve performance and general wellbeing e.g. Ogunyomi and Bruning (2016). Tsai and Wu (2010) argue that such interventions help create a climate that promotes organisational citizenship behaviours as employees become more satisfied with their job. HR practices that enrich jobs through the creative design of tasks stimulate employees and thereby increase commitment and performance e.g. Mihail & Kloutsiniotis (2016a). Other PWB practices to enhance the work environment include investing in physical infrastructure (ergonomics, safety) (Sadatsafavi & Walewski, 2013) and 'situational engineering', which involves techniques designed to alter physical work environments (Wright, 2010).

#### <span id="page-12-7"></span><span id="page-12-3"></span>**Context for mutual gains**

<span id="page-12-5"></span><span id="page-12-2"></span><span id="page-12-1"></span>Clearly there are many contingent factors that enable PWB and organisational performance practices to exist in harmony (Ogbonnaya, Daniels, Connolly, & van Veldhoven, 2017), such as age of employees (Kooij et al., 2013) and national culture (Malek, Mearns, & Flin, 2010). In addition to these exogenous factors that organisations may not be able to influence, there are however endogenous factors that can be shaped, such as focusing on innovation and creating a positive organisational climate without using work intensification practices (Heffernan & Dundon, 2016), and establishing selection practices aimed at recruiting employees that have high organisation and/or job-person fit (Mostafa, 2016).

<span id="page-12-11"></span><span id="page-12-8"></span><span id="page-12-4"></span>Employee perceptions are a strong antecedent of the impact of HR practices for PWB and performance e.g. Shantz et al. (2016). For example, change in organisational logics e.g. public service to for-profit enterprise, may cause employees to perceive changes in HR practices with suspicion e.g. Townsend and Wilkinson (2010). Such a situation is typified in many universities where financial performance is highly prized (including surrogates such as student recruitment and research funding) above other social goals. Employees' perception of organisational support is also crucial. For example, Zhang, Zhu, Dowling, and Bartram (2013) found that employees who perceive the relationship with their employers as an economic exchange will in turn view HR practices for high performance as exploitive, whereas employees that perceive the relationship as a social exchange will in turn view HR practices for high performance as a win-win situation in favour of both employees' well-being and organisational performance. Employees' perception of organisational justice (distributive, procedural and interactional) also has a strong impact on the effects of PWB and organisational performance practices. Toh, Morgeson, and Campion (2008) showed that paradoxes may not emerge if HR practices are consistent with organisational values, in particular when organisational values view employees' PWB as synonymous with organisational performance e.g. Sadatsafavi and Walewski (2013).

<span id="page-13-6"></span><span id="page-13-5"></span>Many 'progressive' organisations will claim that a host of PWB practices are inscribed in policy. However, it is how the practices are introduced and implemented that counts e.g. Woodrow and Guest (2014). The implementation of practices can be improved with effective communication focusing on the manner in which HR policy and intended outcomes of HR practices are shared (Sparks, Faragher, & Cooper, 2001). Van De Voorde and Beijer (2015) suggest that line managers need to effectively convey the purpose of HPWS practices to improve employees' attribution of the practice. Wood and de Menezes (2011) propose that organisations communicate clear-cut outcomes, in particular related to enriching jobs, by enhancing consultation and improving information sharing. In addition, there are some practices that line managers can implement to buffer the impact of performance attributions, such as implementing stress management programmes. Line managers therefore play an important role in how well they adopt and balance HR-related roles, i.e. 'Employee Champion' and 'Strategic Partner' (Shipton, Sanders, Atkinson, & Frenkel, 2016). It is equally crucial that managers are well trained to implement participative leadership e.g. Metz, Brown, Cregan, and Kulik (2014).

#### <span id="page-13-4"></span><span id="page-13-0"></span>Discussion

<span id="page-13-1"></span>The findings show that, while PWB-performance practices can be symbiotic and can lead to mutual gains, and organisations can influence their context to some extent, PWB-performance practices can and do however lead to tensions. How can organisations then deal with situations where PWB-performance practices are paradoxical? The notion that some PWB practices may conflict with organisational performance may not be new, as the fabric of modern organisations themselves are counter to employee PWB (O'Donohue & Nelson, 2014). Nonetheless, it is important that organisations are equipped to deal with paradoxes as they occur, as no one organisation will have a set of 'perfect' circumstances that will allow both PWB and organisational performance to be simultaneously prioritised with no conflict. Smith and Lewis (2011) argue that a paradoxical perspective requires management to address opposites simultaneously, thereby circumventing the need to choose one over the other or to make trade-offs. Ultimately they suggest that the solution to paradoxes demands ... creative sensemaking ... (p. 395). This section discusses how management is able to address paradoxical issues due to PWB and organisational performance practices through sensemaking.

<span id="page-13-3"></span><span id="page-13-2"></span>Sensemaking is homologous to 'organising' in that it aims at restoring cognitive order (Sandberg & Tsoukas, 2015). Sensemaking occurs in both immanent conditions and times of crisis. The genesis of sensemaking varies: it occurs when reality simply does not match 'theory-in-use' (Schwandt, 2005); when an

<span id="page-14-0"></span>**Figure 2.** Conceptual framework: Sensemaking approach in addressing PWB-performance HR practices paradoxes. \*Adapted from Luscher and Lewis (2008).

<span id="page-14-3"></span><span id="page-14-2"></span><span id="page-14-1"></span>individual 'feels' something is not right (Weick, 2006); there is a presence of disruptive ambiguities, crisis and disasters (Weick, Sutcliffe, & Obstfeld, 2005); or where there are threats to identity, epiphanies and even planned changes (Maitlis & Lawrence, 2007). Our conceptual framework (see Figure 2) uses sensemaking as an approach in addressing the PWB-performance paradox by specifically building upon Luscher and Lewis's (2008) work that demonstrates how effective managerial sensemaking helped firms to address paradoxical challenges in times of change. The framework has five stages; (1) mess, (2) problem, (3) dilemma, (4) paradox, and (5) achieving. Organisations move through the stages via four activities; (a) evidence-based enquiry, (b) multiple perspective taking, (c) double loop learning, and (d) reframing.

A mess is a complicated situation and may occur when organisations attempt to balance a firm-wide performance-orientated approach by employing PWB <span id="page-15-1"></span>policies without consideration of existing policies; for example, when WLB policies contradict performance management indicators (Ackoff, 1993). A difficult situation may deteriorate into a 'mess' (1) as HR are unable to reconcile policies to reflect senior management's intentions, resulting in line managers implementing the policies inconsistently. Confusion therefore sets in. To gain clarity, (a) evidence-based enquiry is used as it encourages the specification of outcomes (symptoms) and potential root causes that contribute to the problematic situation (Rousseau & McCarthy, 2007). This approach helps to verify that the issues are genuine and not mere misunderstandings. For example, line managers may point out where the inconsistencies lie in written policies providing opportunities for employee autonomy but at the same time their having to adhere to strict standard operating procedures.

<span id="page-15-6"></span><span id="page-15-4"></span>As the situation becomes clearer, people are able to identify the discrete problems (2). Problems are difficulties that a person or one party faces (D'Zurilla, Nezu, & Maydeu-Olivares, 2004). However, when aggregated and viewed collectively, the problematic situation appears severe. A technical approach to problem-solving is inadequate, as solving one problem may exacerbate another i.e. 'shifting the burden'. For example, line managers may adopt a contingent 'if-then' approach, but this may in fact undermine the reason for the PWB policies, as employees feel there is a lack of procedural justice. To address this situation, (b) multiple perspective taking must be adopted, involving eliciting and understanding the viewpoint of others (Grant & Berry, 2011). This approach helps in gaining a more complete picture of the situation; i.e. 'connecting the dots', which identifies that there are competing and even contradictory views. For example, while employees acknowledge that some wellbeing policies, such as FWA, may not always be for altruistic reasons, they believe that the policy in itself has benefits even though its 'returns' are long-term orientated. This is in contrast to management's view, who may believe that wellbeing is important, but for short-term, instrumental reasons.

<span id="page-15-5"></span><span id="page-15-3"></span><span id="page-15-2"></span><span id="page-15-0"></span>Dilemma (3) sets in as employees in an organisation feel 'stuck' as the options available (e.g. remedies o conflict) are polarities that have both advantages and disadvantages (Aguinis, Gottfredson, & Joo, 2013). When one polarity is favoured, adverse outcomes transpire. For example, with a conviction that challenging jobs lead to learning for performance, management are intent on 'challenging' employees to learn. However this stresses employees, as they may not be able to cope with the challenges and feel that they have to constantly show that they have 'learned', which is not always demonstrable. Double loop learning (c) is a helpful aid in this situation, as it involves questioning one's own beliefs and way of thinking (Argyris, 2002). Questions that arise from a double loop learning process may include: 'why is there a dilemma in the first place?' and 'is this dilemma self-imposed as we take things for granted?' For example, through double loop learning, management may appreciate that psychological safety is crucial, as employees tend to be vulnerable when they learn, especially when stretched doing challenging jobs, and that 'learning' is not always a predictable process (Abubakar & Arasli, 2016).

Ultimately, organisations then find themselves in a paradoxical situation. A paradox (4) occurs when there are persistent contradictory interdependent elements (Schad et al., 2016). For example, performance-orientated practices – such as performance-based compensation packages – create competitive environments that strain relationships between colleagues and invite conflict, which undermine efforts to enhance employee communication and collaboration. In addition, managers may view that an emphasis on wellbeing practices - such as WLB undermine performance-related initiatives, as they give employees excuses for not 'seeing out the work', even after completing their mandatory working hours for that day. Reframing (d) allows organisations to address paradoxes, as it helps to change one's interpretive framework (Maitlis, 2005), which provides a coherent configuration of assumptions, rules, and boundaries (Bartunek, 1984). For example, the reframing of a paradoxical situation allows managers to view such a situation not as one that is debilitating, but as a catalyst for new ways of creatively doing things. Reframing enables managers and employees to accept that paradoxes do not go away but workarounds nevertheless can be identified and developed (e.g. such as adopting this sensemaking framework) in achieving (5) the organisation's intended goals.

#### <span id="page-16-1"></span><span id="page-16-0"></span>Conclusion and future research

By adopting a specific focus on paradoxes between PWB and performance HR practices, we make our first contribution by comprehensively identifying employee PWB and organisational-performance HR practices that are contradictory with one another. Recent research has established that HR practices have varying effects on different occupational groups, and also an unpredictable impact through inconsistent implementation by line managers (Kinnie et al., 2005). There is also the potential for confusion, and contradiction, across HR practices. While it is well established that HR practices in relation to organisational performance are more likely to have a positive impact when 'bundled', there is still a tendency to introduce a single practice for a single purpose. One example is FWA to support PWB. This can ignore the impact in other areas, especially organisational-performance. This is, in part, a cause of confusion through contradictory objectives; e.g. is FWA primarily to promote PWB at the expense of performance? Or, if FWA is introduced to promote organisational-performance by reducing employment costs, is this at the expense of PWB? These questions lead to our first contention here, which is that such questions will be at the heart of future research and concern in professional practice (Guest, 2017), and the focus will be on how to reconcile the apparent contradictions.

In addressing this issue, we offer our second contribution by developing a new sensemaking conceptual framework that demonstrates how the PWBperformance paradox can be addressed. The underlying contention is that there is a need to reframe the apparent contradiction as a paradox. Contradictions are

conceived as problems. In contrast, paradoxes are conceived as natural occurrences in social systems, and as opportunities for positive learning and change. Our central argument is that future research needs to adopt the concept of paradox as a metatheory to analyse and understand how HR practices can complement, rather than contradict, each other. The conceptual framework in Figure 2 is our contribution to enabling and supporting future research into HR practice that promotes both PWB and high performance.

<span id="page-17-2"></span>Finally, we offer our third contribution by identifying contexts for mutual gains as we build upon the work of Guest (2017), who adopted a symbiotic view of PWB practices with organisational performance. Specifically, we complement his work by adopting a more nuanced perspective in identifying endogenous factors that organisations can influence to enhance the synergies put forth by Guest (2017). Our contribution chimes with the work of some authors, e.g. Torre (2012), who have suggested that empirical studies on the effects of HPWS on PWB is mixed, and therefore a 'sceptical view' is appropriate given the paradoxical nature of the relationship and the near-impossibility in categorically attributing the impact of HPWS on PWB. For example, workers involved in HPWS may register higher levels of satisfaction and greater intrinsic rewards from their work, but at the same time they may experience greater anxiety and more intense work rhythms. Authors suggest a causal chain approach be adopted as an analytical approach, as the impact of HR practices is complex, with many latent and mediating factors e.g. Ang et al. (2017). Torre (2012) argues that a more tailored approach is required, as the context in which the practices are introduced and the needs of the individual must be considered. The conclusion of the study is also consistent with other findings related to communication and perceptions of employees on HR practices e.g. Shuck and Reio (2014).

#### Note

<span id="page-17-3"></span><span id="page-17-1"></span><span id="page-17-0"></span>1. The articles are organised alphabetically, as many contain discussions that relate to all four parts in the findings section ie definitions, paradoxical practices, mutual gains and contextual practices for mutual gains

#### **Disclosure statement**

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

#### **ORCID**

Lilian Otaye-Ebede Dhttp://orcid.org/0000-0001-5158-290X

#### References

- <span id="page-18-13"></span>Abubakar, A. M., & Arasli, H. (2016). Dear top management, please don't make me a cynic: Intention to sabotage. Journal of Management Development, 35(10), 1266–1286.
- <span id="page-18-10"></span>Ackoff, R. L. (1993). The art and sciences of mess management. In C. Mabey & B. Mayon-White (Eds.), Managing change. London: PCP.
- <span id="page-18-11"></span>Aguinis, H., Gottfredson, R. K., & Joo, H. (2013). Avoiding a 'me' versus 'we' dilemma: Using performance management to turn teams into a source of competitive advantage. Business Horizons, 56(4), 503-512.
- <span id="page-18-16"></span>\*Alfes, K., Shantz, A., & Truss, C. (2012). The link between perceived HRM practices, performance and well-being: The moderating effect of trust in the employer. Human Resource Management Journal, 22(4), 409-427.
- <span id="page-18-3"></span>Alvesson, M., & Spicer, A. (2012). A stupidity-based theory of organizations. Journal of Management Studies, 49(7), 1194-1220.
- <span id="page-18-15"></span>\*Ang, S. H., Cavanagh, J., Southcombe, A., Bartram, T., Marjoribanks, T., & McNeil, N. (2017). Human resource management, social connectedness and health and well-being of older and retired men: The role of Men's Sheds. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 28(14), 1986-2016.
- <span id="page-18-2"></span>Argyris, C. (1988). Crafting a theory of practice: The case of organizational paradoxes. In R. E. Quinn & K. S. Cameron (Eds.), Paradox and transformation: Towards a Theory of change in organization and management (pp. 255-278). Balinger.
- <span id="page-18-12"></span>Argyris, C. (2002). Double-loop learning, teaching, and research. Academy of Management *Learning & Education*, 1(2), 206–218.
- <span id="page-18-4"></span>Arnold, K. A. (2017). Transformational leadership and employee psychological well-being: A review and directions for future research. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 22(3), 381-393.
- <span id="page-18-5"></span>Arnold, K. A., & Walsh, M. M. (2015). Customer incivility and employee well-being: Testing the moderating effects of meaning, perspective taking and transformational leadership. Work & Stress, 29(4), 362-378.
- <span id="page-18-0"></span>Aryee, S., Walumbwa, F. O., Seidu, E. Y. M., & Otaye, L. E. (2012). Impact of high-performance work systems on individual- and branch-level performance: Test of a multilevel model of intermediate linkages. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97(2), 287–300. doi:10.1037/a0025739
- <span id="page-18-6"></span>Baluch, A. M. (2017). Employee perceptions of HRM and well-being in nonprofit organizations: Unpacking the unintended. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 28(14), 1912-1937.
- <span id="page-18-14"></span>Bartunek, J. M. (1984). Changing interpretive schemes and organizational restructuring: The example of a religious order. *Administrative Science Quarterly*, 29, 355–372.
- <span id="page-18-17"></span>\*Böckerman, P., Bryson, A., & Ilmakunnas, P. (2012). Does high involvement management improve worker wellbeing? Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 84(2), 660–680.
- <span id="page-18-8"></span>\*Boreham, P., Povey, J., & Tomaszewski, W. (2016). Work and social well-being: The impact of employment conditions on quality of life. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 27(6), 593-611.
- <span id="page-18-1"></span>Boselie, P., Brewster, C., & Paauwe, J. (2009). In search of balance-managing the dualities of HRM: An overview of the issues. Personnel Review, 38(5), 461-471.
- <span id="page-18-9"></span>Boxall, P., & Macky, K. (2010). High-performance work systems and employee well-being in New Zealand. In Beyond Skill: Institutions, Organisations and Human Capability (pp. 127-153). Palgrave Macmillan.
- <span id="page-18-7"></span>\*Boxall, P., & Macky, K. (2014). High-involvement work processes, work intensification and employee well-being. Work Employment and Society, 28(6), 963–984.

- <span id="page-19-16"></span>\*Boxall, P., Hutchison, A., & Wassenaar, B. (2015). How do high-involvement work processes influence employee outcomes? An examination of the mediating roles of skill utilisation and intrinsic motivation. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 26(13), 1737-1752.
- <span id="page-19-4"></span>Brown, M., Metz, I., Cregan, C., & Kulik, C. T. (2009). Irreconcilable differences? Strategic human resource management and employee well-being. Asia Pacific Journal of Human Resources, 47(3), 270-294.
- <span id="page-19-3"></span>Brown, A. D., Ainsworth, S., & Grant, D. (2012). The rhetoric of institutional change. *Organization Studies*, *33*(3), 297–321.
- <span id="page-19-13"></span>\*Bui, H. T. M., Liu, G., & Footner, S. (2016). Perceptions of HR practices on job motivation and work-life balance: Mixed drives and outcomes in a labor-intensive sector. International Journal of Manpower, 37(6), 1004-1023.
- <span id="page-19-12"></span>\*Caillier, J. G. (2016). Does satisfaction with family-friendly programs reduce turnover? A panel study conducted in U.S. federal agencies. Public Personnel Management, 45(3), 284-307.
- <span id="page-19-11"></span>\*Cañibano, A. (2013). Implementing innovative HRM: Trade-off effects on employee wellbeing. Management Decision, 51(3), 643-660.
- <span id="page-19-9"></span>Carmeli, A., Yitzhak-Halevy, M., & Weisberg, J. (2009). The relationship between emotional intelligence and psychological wellbeing. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 24(1), 66-78.
- <span id="page-19-8"></span>Cartwright, S. & Cooper, C. L. (Eds.). (2008). The Oxford Handbook of Personnel Psychology. Oxford University Press.
- <span id="page-19-17"></span>\*Carvalho, V. S., & Chambel, M. J. (2014). Work-to-family enrichment and employees' wellbeing: High performance work system and job characteristics. Social Indicators Research, 119(1), 373-387.
- <span id="page-19-18"></span>\*Chan, S. C. H., & Mak, W. M. (2012). High performance human resource practices and organizational performance: The mediating role of occupational safety and health. Journal of Chinese Human Resources Management, 3(2), 136-150.
- <span id="page-19-6"></span>Chao, G. T., & Moon, H. (2005). The cultural mosaic: A metatheory for understanding the complexity of culture. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90(6), 1128-1140.
- <span id="page-19-0"></span>Chu, A., Thorne, A., & Guite, H. (2004). The impact on mental well-being of the urban and physical environment: An assessment of the evidence. Journal of Public Mental Health, 3(2), 17–32.
- <span id="page-19-5"></span>Chung, C. C., & Beamish, P. W. (2010). The trap of continual ownership change in international equity joint ventures. Organization Science, 21(5), 995-1015.
- <span id="page-19-2"></span>Combs, J., Liu, Y. M., Hall, A., & Ketchen, D. (2006). How much do high-performance work practices matter? A meta-analysis of their effects on organizational performance. Personnel Psychology, 59(3), 501-528.
- <span id="page-19-14"></span>\*Conway, E., Fu, N., Monks, K., Alfes, K., & Bailey, C. (2016). Demands or resources? The relationship between HR practices, employee engagement, and emotional exhaustion within a hybrid model of employment relations. Human Resource Management, 55(5), 901–917.
- <span id="page-19-15"></span>D'Zurilla, T. J., Nezu, A. M., & Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2004). Social problem solving: Theory and assessment. In E. Chang, T. J. D'Zurilla, & L. J. Sanna (Eds.), Social problem solving: Theory, research, and training. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
- <span id="page-19-7"></span>Dameron, S., & Torset, C. (2014). The discursive construction of strategists' subjectivities: Towards a paradox lens on strategy. *Journal of Management Studies*, 51(2), 291–319.
- <span id="page-19-1"></span>Danna, K., & Griffin, R. W. (1999). Health and well-being in the workplace: A review and synthesis of the literature. *Journal of Management*, 25, 357–384.
- <span id="page-19-10"></span>\*Decramer, A., Audenaert, M., Van Waevenberg, T., Claevs, T., Claes, C., Vandevelde, S., & Crucke, S. (2015). Does performance management affect nurses' well-being? Evaluation and Program Planning, 49, 98-105.

- <span id="page-20-7"></span>Diener, E., & Suh, E. (1997). Measuring quality of life: Economic, social, and subjective indicators. *Social Indicators Research*, 40(1), 189–216.
- <span id="page-20-4"></span>Dobrow, S. R., Smith, W. K., & Posner, M. A. (2011). Managing the grading paradox: Leveraging the power of choice in the classroom. *Academy of Management Learning & Education*, 10(2), 261–276.
- <span id="page-20-13"></span>Downey, S. N., van der Werff, L., Thomas, K. M., & Plaut, V. C. (2015). The role of diversity practices and inclusion in promoting trust and employee engagement. *Journal of Applied Social Psychology*, 45(1), 35–44.
- <span id="page-20-14"></span>\*Edgar, F., Geare, A., Zhang, J. A., & McAndrew, I. (2015). Mutual gains or conflicting outcomes? How HRM benefits professionals. *International Journal of Manpower*, *36*(8), 1248–1265.
- <span id="page-20-11"></span>\*Fan, D., Cui, L., Zhang, M. M., Zhu, C. J., Härtel, C. E. J., & Nyland, C. (2014). Influence of high performance work systems on employee subjective well-being and job burnout: Empirical evidence from the Chinese healthcare sector. *International Journal of Human Resource Management*, 25(7), 931–950.
- <span id="page-20-2"></span>Francis, H., & Keegan, A. (2006). The changing face of HRM: In search of balance. *Human Resource Management Journal*, 16(3), 231–249.
- <span id="page-20-15"></span>\*Giebels, E., & Janssen, O. (2005). Conflict stress and reduced well-being at work: The buffering effect of third-party help. *European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology*, 14(2), 137–155.
- <span id="page-20-12"></span>Grant, A. M., & Berry, J. W. (2011). The necessity of others is the mother of invention: Intrinsic and prosocial motivations, perspective taking, and creativity. *Academy of Management Journal*, 54(1), 73–96.
- <span id="page-20-16"></span>\*Grant, A. M., Christianson, M. K., & Price, R. H. (2007). Happiness, health, or relationships? Managerial practices and employee well-being tradeoffs. *Academy of Management Perspectives*, 21, 51–63.
- <span id="page-20-0"></span>Guest, D. E. (1999). Human resource management the workers' verdict. *Human Resource Management Journal*, 9, 5–25.
- <span id="page-20-3"></span>\*Guest, D. E. (2017). Human resource management and employee well-being: Towards a new analytic framework. *Human Resource Management Journal*, *27*(1), 22–38.
- <span id="page-20-9"></span>\*Guillaume, Y. R. F., Dawson, J. F., Otaye-Ebede, L., Woods, S. A., & West, M. A. (2017). Harnessing demographic differences in organizations: What moderates the effects of workplace diversity? *Journal of Organizational Behavior*, 38(2), 276–303.
- <span id="page-20-6"></span>Hahn, T., Preuss, L., Pinkse, J., & Figge, F. (2014). Cognitive frames in corporate sustainability: Managerial sensemaking with paradoxical and business case frames. Academy of Management Review, 39(4), 463–487.
- <span id="page-20-1"></span>Hardy, G. E., Woods, D., & Wall, T. D. (2003). The impact of psychological distress on absence from work. *Journal of Applied Psychology*, 88, 306–314.
- <span id="page-20-8"></span>\*Heffernan, M., & Dundon, T. (2016). Cross-level effects of high-performance work systems (HPWS) and employee well-being: The mediating effect of organisational justice. *Human Resource Management Journal*, 26(2), 211–231.
- <span id="page-20-5"></span>Hesketh, A., & Fleetwood, S. (2006). Beyond measuring the human resources management-organizational performance link: Applying critical realist meta-theory. *Organization*, *13*(5), 677–699.
- <span id="page-20-17"></span>\*Holland, P. J., Allen, B. C., & Cooper, B. K. (2013). Reducing burnout in Australian nurses: The role of employee direct voice and managerial responsiveness. *International Journal of Human Resource Management*, 24(16), 3146–3162.
- <span id="page-20-10"></span>\*Huang, L. C., Ahlstrom, D., Lee, A. Y. P., Chen, S. Y., & Hsieh, M. J. (2016). High performance work systems, employee well-being, and job involvement: An empirical study. *Personnel Review*, 45(2), 296–314.

- <span id="page-21-18"></span>\*Ilies, R., Schwind, K. M., & Heller, D. (2007). Employee well-being: A multilevel model linking work and nonwork domains. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 16(3), 326-341.
- <span id="page-21-0"></span>Jackson, S. E., Schuler, R. S., & Jiang, K. (2014). An aspirational framework for strategic human resource management. The Academy of Management Annals, 8(1), 1-56.
- <span id="page-21-5"></span>Jarvensivu, T., & Moller, K. (2009). Metatheory of network management: A contingency perspective. Industrial Marketing Management, 38(6), 654-661.
- <span id="page-21-19"></span>\*Joo, B. K., Park, J. G., & Lim, T. (2016). Structural determinants of psychological well-being for knowledge workers in South Korea. Personnel Review, 45(5), 1069–1086.
- <span id="page-21-12"></span>\*Karimi, L., Cheng, C., Bartram, T., Leggat, S. G., & Sarkeshik, S. (2015). The effects of emotional intelligence and stress-related presenteeism on nurses' well-being. Asia Pacific Journal of Human Resources, 53(3), 296-310.
- <span id="page-21-6"></span>Kinnie, N. J., Swart, J., & Purcell, J. (2005). Influences on the choice of HR system: The network organization perspective. The International Journal of Human Resource Management, 16(6), 1004-1028.
- <span id="page-21-11"></span>\*Kira, M., & Balkin, D. B. (2014). Interactions between work and identities: Thriving, withering, or redefining the self? Human Resource Management Review, 24(2), 131-143.
- <span id="page-21-7"></span>Klang, D., Wallnöfer, M., & Hacklin, F. (2014). The business model paradox: A systematic review and exploration of antecedents. International Journal of Management Reviews, 16(4), 454-478.
- <span id="page-21-8"></span>\*de Koeijer, R. J., Paauwe, J., & Huijsman, R. (2014). Toward a conceptual framework for exploring multilevel relationships between Lean Management and Six Sigma, enabling HRM, strategic climate and outcomes in healthcare. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 25(21), 2911-2925.
- <span id="page-21-13"></span>\*Kooij, D. T., Guest, D. E., Clinton, M., Knight, T., Jansen, P. G., & Dikkers, J. S. (2013). How the impact of HR practices on employee well-being and performance changes with age. Human Resource Management Journal, 23(1), 18-35.
- <span id="page-21-9"></span>\*Lange, T. (2013). Scarred from the past or afraid of the future? Unemployment and job satisfaction across European labour markets. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 24(6), 1096-1112.
- <span id="page-21-4"></span>Lewis, M. W., & Smith, W. K. (2014). Paradox as a metatheoretical perspective: Sharpening the focus and widening the scope. The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 50(2), 127–149.
- <span id="page-21-10"></span>Liu, N. C., & Wang, C. Y. (2011). Searching for a balance: Work-family practices, workteam design, and organizational performance. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 22(10), 2071-2085.
- <span id="page-21-3"></span>Luscher, L. S., & Lewis, M. W. (2008). Organizational change and managerial sensemaking: Working through paradox. Academy of Management Journal, 51(2), 221–240.
- <span id="page-21-17"></span>Maitlis, S. (2005). The social processes of organizational sensemaking. Academy of Management Journal, 48(1), 21-49.
- <span id="page-21-16"></span>Maitlis, S., & Lawrence, T. B. (2007). Triggers and enablers of sensegiving in organizations. Academy of Management Journal, 50(1), 57-84.
- <span id="page-21-14"></span>\*Malek, M. D. A., Mearns, K., & Flin, R. (2010). Stress and psychological well-being in UK and Malaysian fire fighters. Cross Cultural Management: An International Journal, 17(1), 50-61.
- <span id="page-21-1"></span>Marquis, C., & Tilcsik, A. (2013). Imprinting: Towards a multilevel theory. The Academy of Management Annals, 7(1), 193-243.
- <span id="page-21-2"></span>McGrath, J. (1982). Dilemmatics: The study of research choices and dilemmas. In J. McGrath (Ed.), Judgment calls in research (pp. 69-80). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
- <span id="page-21-15"></span>\*Metz, I., Brown, M., Cregan, C., & Kulik, C. T. (2014). 'Toxin handling' and well-being: The case of the human resources manager. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 23(2), 248-262.

- <span id="page-22-15"></span>\*Michie, S., & West, M. A. (2004). Managing people and performance: An evidence based framework applied to health service organizations. *International Journal of Management Reviews*, 5–6(2), 91–111.
- <span id="page-22-6"></span>\*van Mierlo, H., Rutte, C., Vermunt, J., Kompier, M., & Doorewaard, J. (2006). Individual autonomy in work teams: The role of team autonomy, self-efficacy, and social support. *European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology*, 15(3), 281–299.
- <span id="page-22-11"></span>\*Mihail, D. M., & Kloutsiniotis, P. V. (2016a). The effects of high-performance work systems on hospital employees' work-related well-being: Evidence from Greece. *European Management Journal*, 34(4), 424–438.
- Mihail, D. M., & Kloutsiniotis, P. V. (2016b). Modeling patient care quality: An empirical high-performance work system approach. *Personnel Review*, 45(6), 1176–1199.
- <span id="page-22-13"></span>\*Mostafa, A. M. S. (2016). High-performance HR practices, work stress and quit intentions in the public health sector: Does person–organization fit matter? *Public Management Review*, 18(8), 1218–1237.
- <span id="page-22-14"></span>\*O'Donohue, W., & Nelson, L. (2014). Alienation: An old concept with contemporary relevance for human resource management. *International Journal of Organizational Analysis*, 22(3), 301–316.
- <span id="page-22-12"></span>\*Ogbonnaya, C., Daniels, K., Connolly, S., & van Veldhoven, M. (2017). Integrated and isolated impact of high-performance work practices on employee health and well-being: A comparative study. *Journal of Occupational Health Psychology*, 22(1), 98–114.
- <span id="page-22-10"></span>\*Ogunyomi, P., & Bruning, N. S. (2016). Human resource management and organizational performance of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in Nigeria. *International Journal of Human Resource Management*, 27(6), 612–634.
- <span id="page-22-3"></span>Panaccio, A., & Vandenberghe, C. (2009). Perceived organizational support, organizational commitment and psychological well-being: A longitudinal study. *Journal of Vocational Behavior*, 75(2), 224–236.
- <span id="page-22-8"></span>\*Park, R., & Searcy, D. (2012). Job autonomy as a predictor of mental well-being: The moderating role of quality-competitive environment. *Journal of Business and Psychology*, 27(3), 305–316.
- <span id="page-22-0"></span>Park, S., & Sturman, M. C. (2016). Evaluating form and functionality of pay-for-performance plans: The relative incentive and sorting effects of merit pay, bonuses, and long-term incentives. *Human Resource Management*, 55(4), 697–719. doi:10.1002/hrm.21740
- <span id="page-22-7"></span>\*Park, J. G., Kim, J. S., Yoon, S. W., & Joo, B. K. (2017). The effects of empowering leadership on psychological well-being and job engagement The mediating role of psychological capital. *Leadership & Organization Development Journal*, 38(3), 350–367.
- <span id="page-22-16"></span>\*Pas, B., Peters, P., Doorewaard, H., Eisinga, R., & Lagro-Janssen, T. (2011). Feminisation of the medical profession: A strategic HRM dilemma? The effects of family-friendly HR practices on female doctors' contracted working hours. *Human Resource Management Journal*, 21(3), 285–302.
- <span id="page-22-5"></span>Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Bacharach, D. G., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2005). The influence of management journals in the 1980s and 1990s. *Strategic Management Journal*, 26, 473–488.
- <span id="page-22-2"></span>Poole, M. S., & Van de Ven, A. H. (1989). Toward a general theory of innovation processes. In A. Van de Ven, H. Angle, & M. S. Poole (Eds.), *Research on the Management of Innovation* (pp. 637–662). New York, NY: Harper & Row.
- <span id="page-22-1"></span>Qiu, J., Donaldson, L., & Luo, B. N. (2012). The benefits of persisting with paradigms in organizational research. *Academy of Management Perspectives*, 26(1), 93–104.
- <span id="page-22-4"></span>Rahimnia, F., & Sharifirad, M. S. (2015). Authentic leadership and employee well-being: The mediating role of attachment insecurity. *Journal of Business Ethics*, 132(2), 363–377.
- <span id="page-22-9"></span>\*Reio, T. G., & Ghosh, R. (2009). Antecedents and outcomes of workplace incivility: Implications for human resource development research and practice. *Human Resource Development Quarterly*, 20(3), 237–264.

- <span id="page-23-3"></span>Ritzer, G. (1990). Metatheorizing in sociology. *Sociological Forum*, 5(1), 3–15.
- <span id="page-23-9"></span>Robertson, I. T., Birch, A. J., & Cooper, C. L. (2012). Job and work attitudes, engagement and employee performance: Where does psychological well-being fit in? Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 33(3-4), 224-232.
- <span id="page-23-18"></span>Rousseau, D. M., & McCarthy, S. (2007). Educating managers from an evidence-based perspective. Academy of Management Learning & Education, 6(1), 84–101.
- <span id="page-23-13"></span>Rudolph, C. W., & Baltes, B. B. (2017). Age and health jointly moderate the influence of flexible work arrangements on work engagement: Evidence from two empirical studies. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 22(1), 40–58.
- <span id="page-23-8"></span>Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2001). On happiness and human potentials: A review of research on hedonic and eudaimonic well-being. Annual Review of Psychology, 52(1), 141-166.
- <span id="page-23-6"></span>Ryff, C. D. (1989a). Beyond ponce de leon and life satisfaction: New directions in quest of successful ageing. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 12(1), 35-55.
- Ryff, C. D. (1989b). Happiness is everything, or is it? Explorations on the meaning of psychological well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57(6), 1069-1081.
- <span id="page-23-4"></span>Ryff, C. D. (1995). Psychological well-being in adult life. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 4(4), 99-104.
- <span id="page-23-7"></span>Ryff, C. D., & Keyes, C. L. M. (1995). The structure of psychological well-being revisited. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69(4), 719-727.
- <span id="page-23-14"></span>\*Sadatsafavi, H., & Walewski, J. (2013). Corporate sustainability: The environmental design and human resource management interface in healthcare settings. HERD: Health Environments Research & Design Journal, 6(2), 98-118.
- <span id="page-23-16"></span>Sandberg, J., & Tsoukas, H. (2015). Making sense of the sensemaking perspective: Its constituents, limitations, and opportunities for further development. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 36, S6-S32.
- <span id="page-23-11"></span>\*Šarotar Žižek, S., Treven, S., & Čančer, V. (2015). Employees in Slovenia and their psychological well-being based on Ryff's model of psychological well-being. Social Indicators Research, 121(2), 483-502.
- <span id="page-23-12"></span>\*Schabracq, M. J., & Cooper, C. L. (1997). Flexibility of labor, well-being, and stress. International Journal of Stress Management, 4(4), 259-274.
- <span id="page-23-0"></span>Schad, J., Lewis, M. W., Raisch, S., & Smith, W. K. (2016). Paradox research in management science: Looking back to move forward. Academy of Management Annals, 10(1), 5-64.
- <span id="page-23-2"></span>Scherer, A. G., Palazzo, G., & Seidl, D. (2013). Managing legitimacy in complex and heterogeneous environments: Sustainable development in a globalized world. Journal of Management Studies, 50(2), 259-284.
- <span id="page-23-5"></span>Schmutte, P. S., & Ryff, C. D. (1997). Personality and well-being: Reexamining methods and meanings. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73(3), 549-559.
- <span id="page-23-17"></span>Schwandt, D. R. (2005). When managers become philosophers: Integrating learning with sensemaking. Academy of Management Learning & Education, 4(2), 176–192.
- <span id="page-23-1"></span>Seo, M. G., & Creed, W. E. D. (2002). Institutional contradictions, praxis, and institutional change: A dialectical perspective. Academy of Management Review, 27(2), 222-247.
- <span id="page-23-10"></span>\*Shantz, A., Arevshatian, L., Alfes, K., & Bailey, C. (2016). The effect of HRM attributions on emotional exhaustion and the mediating roles of job involvement and work overload. Human Resource Management Journal, 26(2), 172-191.
- <span id="page-23-15"></span>\*Shipton, H., Sanders, K., Atkinson, C., & Frenkel, S. (2016). Sense-giving in health care: The relationship between the HR roles of line managers and employee commitment. Human Resource Management Journal, 26(1), 29-45.
- <span id="page-23-19"></span>\*Shuck, B., & Reio, T. G. (2014). Employee engagement and well-being: A moderation model and implications for practice. *Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies*, 21(1), 43–58.

- <span id="page-24-10"></span>\*Sloan, M. M. (2008). Emotion management and workplace status: Consequences for well-being. *International Journal of Work Organisation and Emotion*, 2(3), 236–255.
- <span id="page-24-1"></span>Smith, A., & Graetz, F. (2006). Organizing dualities and strategizing for change. *Strategic Change*, 15(5), 231–239.
- <span id="page-24-0"></span>Smith, W. K., & Lewis, M. W. (2011). Toward a theory of paradox: A dynamic equilibrium model of organizing. *Academy of Management Review*, 36(2), 381–403.
- <span id="page-24-2"></span>Smith, W. K., Binns, A., & Tushman, M. L. (2010). Complex business models: Managing strategic paradoxes simultaneously. *Long Range Planning*, 43, 448–461.
- <span id="page-24-16"></span>\*Sparks, K., Faragher, B., & Cooper, C. L. (2001). Well-being and occupational health in the 21st century workplace. *Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology*, 74(4), 489–509.
- <span id="page-24-13"></span>\*Spreitzer, G., Sutcliffe, K., Dutton, J., Sonenshein, S., & Grant, A. M. (2005). A socially embedded model of thriving at work. *Organization Science*, *16*(5), 537–549.
- <span id="page-24-8"></span>\*Stengård, J., Bernhard-Oettel, C., Näswall, K., Ishäll, L., & Berntson, E. (2015). Understanding the determinants of well-being and organizational attitudes during a plant closure: A Swedish case study. *Economic and Industrial Democracy*, 36(4), 611–631.
- <span id="page-24-20"></span>\*Stormer, F. (2008). The logic of contingent work and overwork. *Relations Industrielles-Industrial Relations*, 63(2), 343–361.
- <span id="page-24-3"></span>Sundaramurthy, C., & Lewis, M. W. (2003). Control and collaboration: Paradoxes of governance. *Academy of Management Review*, 28(3), 397–415.
- <span id="page-24-15"></span>\*Toh, S. M., Morgeson, F. P., & Campion, M. A. (2008). Human resource configurations: Investigating fit with the organizational context. *Journal of Applied Psychology*, 93(4), 864–882.
- <span id="page-24-7"></span>Torraco, R. J. (2016). Writing integrative literature reviews: Using the past and present to explore the future. *Human Resource Development Review*, 15(4), 404–428.
- <span id="page-24-19"></span>\*Torre, E. D. (2012). High performance work systems and workers' well-being: A sceptical view. *International Journal of Work Innovation*, 1(1), 7–23.
- <span id="page-24-12"></span>\*Townsend, K., & Wilkinson, A. (2010). Managing under pressure: HRM in hospitals. *Human Resource Management Journal*, 20(4), 332–338.
- <span id="page-24-14"></span>\*Tsai, Y. F., & Wu, S. W. (2010). The relationships between organisational citizenship behaviour, job satisfaction and turnover intention. *Journal of Clinical Nursing*, 19(23–24), 3564–3574.
- <span id="page-24-4"></span>Tsoukas, H. (1994). What is management? An outline of a metatheory. *British Journal of Management*, 5(4), 289–301.
- <span id="page-24-5"></span>Tsoukas, H. (2017). Don't simplify, complexify: From disjunctive to conjunctive theorizing in organization and management studies. *Journal of Management Studies*, 54(2), 132–153.
- <span id="page-24-11"></span>\*Van De Voorde, K., & Beijer, S. (2015). The role of employee HR attributions in the relationship between high-performance work systems and employee outcomes. *Human Resource Management Journal*, 25(1), 62–78.
- <span id="page-24-21"></span>\*Van De Voorde, K., Paauwe, J., & Van Veldhoven, M. (2012). Employee well-being and the HRM-organizational performance relationship: A review of quantitative studies. *International Journal of Management Reviews*, 14(4), 391–407.
- <span id="page-24-6"></span>Warr, P. (1990). The measurement of well-being and other aspects of mental health. *Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology*, 63(3), 193–210.
- <span id="page-24-17"></span>Weick, K. E. (2006). Faith, evidence, and action: Better guesses in an unknowable world. *Organization Studies*, *27*(11), 1723–1736.
- <span id="page-24-18"></span>Weick, K. E., Sutcliffe, K. M., & Obstfeld, D. (2005). Organizing and the process of sensemaking. *Organization Science*, *16*(4), 409–421.
- <span id="page-24-9"></span>\*Wood, S., & de Menezes, L. M. (2011). High involvement management, high-performance work systems and well-being. *International Journal of Human Resource Management*, 22(7), 1586–1610.

- <span id="page-25-1"></span>\*Wood, S., Van Veldhoven, M., Croon, M., & de Menezes, L. M. (2012). Enriched job design, high involvement management and organizational performance: The mediating roles of job satisfaction and well-being. Human Relations, 65(4), 419-445.
- <span id="page-25-4"></span>\*Woodrow, C., & Guest, D. E. (2014). When good HR gets bad results: Exploring the challenge of HR implementation in the case of workplace bullying. Human Resource Management Journal, 24(1), 38-56.
- <span id="page-25-2"></span>\*Wright, T. A. (2010). Much more than meets the eye: The role of psychological well-being in job performance, employee retention and cardiovascular health. Organizational Dynamics, 39(1), 13-23.
- <span id="page-25-0"></span>Wright, T. A., & Cropanzano, R. (2000). Psychological well-being and job satisfaction as predictors of job performance. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 5(1), 84-94.
- <span id="page-25-5"></span>\*Zacharatos, A., Hershcovis, M. S., Turner, N., & Barling, J. (2007). Human resource management in the North American automotive industry: A meta-analytic review. Personnel Review, 36(2), 231-254.
- <span id="page-25-3"></span>\*Zhang, M. Q., Zhu, C. J., Dowling, P. J., & Bartram, T. (2013). Exploring the effects of highperformance work systems (HPWS) on the work-related well-being of Chinese hospital employees. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 24(16), 3196-3212.

## <span id="page-26-0"></span>\*Part of sample reviewed.

# <span id="page-26-2"></span><span id="page-26-1"></span>**Appendix: Summary of findings[1](#page-17-3)**

| Study                                       | Method                                                                                                                                           | Organisational performance practices                                                                                                                                                              | WB) dimension<br>Psychological wellbeing (P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|---------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Alfes, Shantz, and Truss<br>(2012)          | Quantitative. 613 employees and their line manag<br>ers in a service sector organisation in the UK                                               | HRM practices<br>Perceived                                                                                                                                                                        | uring employee wellbeing but there was no specific<br>The General Health Questionnaire was used in meas-<br>conceptualisation of the term in the study                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Ang et al. (2017)                           | groups in an Australian health care organisation<br>Hypotheses testing study with 193 employee and<br>58 manager respondents across occupational | HPWS which included recruitment and selection; per<br>formance management; L&D equal opportunities;<br>and employee participation                                                                 | Indirect focus on any aspect of wellbeing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Böckerman, Bryson, and<br>Ilmakunnas (2012) | Quantitative. 4300 participants from the Finnish<br>Quality of Work Life Survey of 2008                                                          | teams, information sharing, employer provided<br>Innovative work practices (HPWS): self-managed<br>training, and incentive pay                                                                    | Inverse of sickness absence and accidents at work                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Boreham et al. (2016)                       | Quantitative. 1653 respondents from the Study of<br>Social Wellbeing in Queensland, Australia                                                    | HPWS: Participative management, flexible work hours,<br>employment insecurity                                                                                                                     | Leisure opportunities, Respect accorded by others,<br>cial assets, Personal security, Natural environment,<br>accommodation, Income, Savings and other finan<br>ships, Ability to afford essential items, Housing or<br>Job or work, and Level of stress you normally feel.<br>Social wellbeing measure: Health, Family relation |
| Boxall, Hutchison, and<br>Wassenaar (2015)  | Quantitative. 285 respondents from a large New<br>Zealand distribution service organisation                                                      | High-involvement work processes: (P)Power/autonomy<br>(K)Training and development<br>(I)Information/voice<br>(R)Reward                                                                            | Inverse of stress                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Macky (2014)<br>Boxall and                  | interviews in New Zealand across industries and<br>Hypotheses testing study with 1016 telephone<br>occupations                                   | (autonomy and participation in decision-making)<br>with related measures of the power, information,<br>HPWS generally but specifically High Involvement<br>rewards and knowledge (PIRK) framework | Job satisfaction; job related stress; and fatigue                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Bui et al. (2016)                           | Quantitative. 709 workers in UK residential care<br>organisations                                                                                | Recognition, fair rewards, empowerment and compe<br>tence development                                                                                                                             | Job satisfaction, organisational commitment and<br>perceived organisational support                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Caillier (2016)                             | Quantitative. The authors used panel data derived<br>from two sources: Federal Employee Viewpoint<br>Survey and the FedScope                     | Flexible work programs (telework and alternative work<br>schedule)                                                                                                                                | employee assistance programs, dependent care<br>Family friendly programs: elder care programs,<br>programs and health and wellness programs                                                                                                                                                                                      |

(*Continued*)

<span id="page-27-5"></span><span id="page-27-4"></span><span id="page-27-3"></span><span id="page-27-2"></span><span id="page-27-1"></span><span id="page-27-0"></span>

|    | _             |    |
|----|---------------|----|
| ۲  | =             | _  |
|    | С             | 7  |
|    | -             | 7  |
|    | σ             | J  |
|    | -             |    |
|    | _             | 2  |
|    | ~             |    |
|    | 7             | Ĕ. |
|    | -             | =  |
| ٠, | _             | 3  |
|    | Ξ             | •  |
|    | $\mathbf{c}$  | -  |
|    | _             | -  |
|    | $\overline{}$ | ١. |
| ٠  | -             | •  |
| ۱  |               | 1  |
|    | _             | •  |
|    |               |    |
|    |               |    |
|    | _             | _  |
|    | _             |    |
|    | _             | :  |
|    | <u> </u>      | :  |
|    | <u>×</u>      |    |
|    | ×             |    |
|    | ×             |    |
| •  | ×             |    |
| :  | X             |    |
| :  | אוכע          |    |
| •  | XI DUK        |    |
| •  | PUCIN         |    |
| •  | ADUA          |    |
| •  | X Due         |    |
| •  | None of       |    |
| •  | XIDUAUC       |    |
| •  | phonolix      |    |
| •  | Innendix      |    |
|    | Annendix      |    |

| Study                                                 | Method                                                                                                                                   | Organisational performance practices                                                                                                                                                             | Psychological wellbeing (PWB) dimension                                                                                                                  |
|-------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Cañibano (2013)                                       | Qualitative data collected from an in-depth case study via document analysis and 50 semi-structured interviews with HR practitioners and | Innovative HRM practices (also called high commitment, high involvement or high performance work practices)                                                                                      | People's self-described happiness, including positive states such as enthusiasm or cheerfulness, as well as negative states like depression, distress or |
| Carvalho and Chambel<br>(2014)                        | employees<br>Quantitative. 1390 employees from a Portuguese<br>bank                                                                      | Perceptions of HPWS                                                                                                                                                                              | anxlery<br>Satisfaction of life and health perceptions                                                                                                   |
| Chan and Mak (2012)                                   | Quantitative. 227 HRM professionals in Hong Kong,<br>the People's Republic of China                                                      | High performance HR practices; job security, enlarged jobs, internal promotion, selection, high remuneration, training, information sharing, performance feedback occupational safety and health | Organisational safety and health (measured using perceived safety climate)                                                                               |
| Conway et al. (2016)                                  | Quantitative. 2348 respondents from a large public-sector organisation in Ireland                                                        | Performance management, employee voice                                                                                                                                                           | Emotional exhaustion and engagement                                                                                                                      |
| de Koeijer et al. (2014)                              | Conceptual paper                                                                                                                         | Training and development, performance appraisal and rewards, team working and autonomy, participation and job design, recruitment and selection, employment security, WLB                        | Happiness, health and trusting relationships                                                                                                             |
| Decramer et al. (2015)                                | 140 nurses from a Flemish hospital                                                                                                       | Perception of performance management systems: performance planning, performance evaluation and vertical alignment                                                                                | Affective wellbeing: job satisfaction and affective commitment                                                                                           |
| Downey, van der Werff,<br>Thomas, and Plaut<br>(2015) | Quantitative. 4,597 health sector employees                                                                                              | Diversity practices                                                                                                                                                                              | Engagement                                                                                                                                               |
| Edgar, Geare, Zhang, and<br>McAndrew (2015)           | Quantitative. 215 professionals in New Zealand                                                                                           | Commitment-oriented HRM practices                                                                                                                                                                | Employees' happiness and health: work intensification and WLB                                                                                            |
| Fan et al. (2014)                                     | Quantitative. 1488 physicians and nurses in 25<br>Chinese hospitals                                                                      | HPWS                                                                                                                                                                                             | Subjective wellbeing (i.e. happiness) and workplace burnout                                                                                              |
| Giebels and Janssen<br>(2005)                         | Hypotheses testing with 108 respondents from<br>Dutch social workers                                                                     | Third party intervention/mediation in conflict at work                                                                                                                                           | Stress and emotional exhaustion                                                                                                                          |
| Grant, Christianson, and<br>Price (2007)              | Review artide                                                                                                                            | Job redesign; incentives/compensation; team building;<br>and safety practices                                                                                                                    | Encompasses all elements of wellbeing. Specific aspects related to PWB include job satisfaction, stress and fatigue                                      |

| ٦ |   | ` | ١. |  |
|---|---|---|----|--|
|   | _ |   | ۸  |  |
|   |   |   |    |  |

<span id="page-28-3"></span><span id="page-28-2"></span><span id="page-28-1"></span><span id="page-28-0"></span>

| Appendix.  (Continued) |  |
|------------------------|--|
|                        |  |
|                        |  |
|                        |  |

| Study                                      | Method                                                                                                                                                                                      | Organisational performance practices                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | WB) dimension<br>Psychological wellbeing (P                                                                                                                                        |
|--------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Guest (2017)                               | Conceptual article                                                                                                                                                                          | Most having positive (for employers) and negative (for<br>working leading to insecure forms of employment;<br>talent management leading to growing inequality<br>in pay and reward; HPWS leading to work intensifi<br>employees) impact. For example, focus on flexible<br>cation | ing – accepts the psychological conditions of job<br>psychological and social categories of wellbe<br>Follows Grant et al. (2007) in applying physical,<br>satisfaction and stress |
| Guillaume et al. (2017)                    | Meta-analysis                                                                                                                                                                               | Diversity management related practices; e.g. diversity<br>training                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Indirectly focused on PWB. Rather, a generalised<br>conception of wellbeing is applied                                                                                             |
| Heffernan and Dundon<br>(2016)             | Hypothesis testing, cross level study with 187<br>respondents from 3 employers in Ireland                                                                                                   | HPWS practices                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | to PWB indicators of happiness, job satisfaction and<br>Focus on general wellbeing but with results related<br>stress                                                              |
| Holland, Allen, and<br>Cooper (2013)       | A hypotheses testing study with 762 respondents<br>from Australian nurses                                                                                                                   | Employee voice and management responsiveness                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Stress and burnout                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Huang et al. (2016)                        | HPWS, PWB (conceptualised and operationalised<br>in Taiwan. Examined the relationship between<br>Hypotheses testing study with 500 respondents<br>here as 'happiness'), and job involvement | HPWS scale                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Utilised the Oxford Happiness Questonnaire                                                                                                                                         |
| Ilies, Schwind, and Heller<br>(2007)       | Conceptual paper                                                                                                                                                                            | Indirectly examined                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Job satisfaction                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Joo, Park, and Lim (2016)                  | Hypotheses testing study with 334 respondents<br>among knowledge workers in South Korea                                                                                                     | Leadership development; job design for empower<br>ment                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | The Ryff and Keyes (1995) PWB model                                                                                                                                                |
| Karimi et al. (2015)                       | Hypotheses testing study of 312 nurses in Australia                                                                                                                                         | None in research design but implication supporting<br>training for emotional intelligence                                                                                                                                                                                         | Stress caused by presenteeism                                                                                                                                                      |
| Kira and Balkin (2014)                     | Mainly conceptual with some empirical, qualitative<br>data                                                                                                                                  | Job design                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Introduces the concepts of thriving and withering                                                                                                                                  |
| Kooij et al. (2013)                        | Hypotheses testing study of 6,400 employees in 3<br>UK public sector organisations                                                                                                          | Developmental and maintenance bundles of HPWS<br>practices                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Job satisfaction and organisation commitment                                                                                                                                       |
| Lange (2013)                               | Hypotheses testing study using secondary analysis<br>of a large data-set; 3,411 employees from 17<br>EU<br>countries across the                                                             | Main focus was on perceived<br>Not explicitly included.<br>job (in)security                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Job satisfaction                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Liu and Wang (2011)<br>Malek et al. (2010) | Malaysian and<br>Questionnaire survey of 204 companies in Taiwan<br>Hypotheses testing study with 617<br>436 UK firefighters                                                                | Training and support; e.g. counselling for stress coping<br>Work/family practices and work/team design<br>strategies                                                                                                                                                              | Job satisfaction. Anxiety; stress; depression<br>via work/family balance                                                                                                           |
| Metz et al. (2014)                         | Managers<br>HR<br>Semi-structured interviews with 19<br>in Australia                                                                                                                        | Stress management mechanisms (among a wide range<br>HR support practices)<br>of non-                                                                                                                                                                                              | Stress and emotional exhaustion                                                                                                                                                    |
| Michie and West (2004)                     | Review and conceptual paper focused on health                                                                                                                                               | HR and people management practices<br>All                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Health and stress; satisfaction and commitment                                                                                                                                     |
|                                            | care sector                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | (Continued)                                                                                                                                                                        |

(*Continued*)

<span id="page-29-0"></span>

| Appendix.  (Continued) |
|------------------------|
|                        |
|                        |

| Study                                                             | Method                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Organisational performance practices                                                                                                                 | WB) dimension<br>Psychological wellbeing (P                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Mihail and Kloutsiniotis<br>(2016a)                               | Hypotheses testing study with 297 medical profes<br>sional respondents in Greece                                                                                                                                           | HPWS                                                                                                                                                 | Job satisfaction and affective commitment linked to<br>experienced wellbeing                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Mostafa (2016)                                                    | Hypotheses testing study with 340 health care<br>professionals in Egypt                                                                                                                                                    | ment, job security, promotion, work autonomy and<br>HPWS Practices; specifically training and develop<br>communication                               | Job/work stress                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| O'Donohue and Nelson<br>(2014)                                    | Conceptual paper                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Generally, HPWS                                                                                                                                      | Alienation as defined in existential psychology                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Ogbonnaya et al. (2017)                                           | Hypotheses testing study using secondary analysis<br>of large datasets; 22,451 employees in one and<br>164,916 employees in the second.                                                                                    | Integrated HPWS and analysis of some isolated (single<br>practice) effects                                                                           | Job satisfaction; commitment; (low) anxiety                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Ogunyomi and Bruning<br>(2016)                                    | Hypotheses testing study with 236 respondents<br>in Nigeria                                                                                                                                                                | HRM practices encompassed by resourcing;<br>reward; development; performance management<br>and occupational health and safety<br>A range of          | The focus was on direct and indirect impacts of the<br>practices on non-financial and financial organisa<br>tion performance                                                                                                                        |
| Park et al. (2017)                                                | Hypotheses testing study with 285 respondents in<br>South Korea                                                                                                                                                            | None specifically. The focus was on empowering<br>leadership practices                                                                               | Adapted from Ryff and Keyes (1995)                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Park and Searcy (2012)                                            | Hypotheses testing study using secondary analysis<br>of a large data-set; 14,026 UK respondents                                                                                                                            | Job design (i.e. job autonomy)                                                                                                                       | War's (1990) anxiety-contentment measure                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Lagro-Janssen (2011)<br>waard, Eisinga, and<br>Pas, Peters, Doore | in Holland. Examined the relationships between<br>Hypotheses testing study with 1070 respondents<br>taken up on working hours of female medical<br>HR practices offered and<br>family friendly/WLB<br>professionals        | working); and Full Participation Arrangements (e.g.<br>Reduced Participation Arrangements (e.g. part time<br>flexible working; child care provision) | respondents of 'workforce philosophy' as a mediat<br>No direct or specific focus on aspects of wellbeing.<br>Interesting focus on employee perceptions of<br>ing factor/variable                                                                    |
| Reio and Ghosh (2009)                                             | adaptation, employee affect, and incivility and<br>examined the relationships among workplace<br>Cross-sectional, correlational study (N = 402)<br>physical health and job satisfaction                                    | Learning and development                                                                                                                             | inspired, fearful, thrilled, strained, tired, distressed,<br>a number of emotions, such as feeling uneasy,<br>depressed, relaxed, tense, frustrated, nervous,<br>Part of the 'employee affect' construct based on<br>angry, sleepless, and stressed |
| Rudolph and Baltes<br>(2017)                                      | the role of health and age as joint moderators of<br>pants. Study 1 investigated how FWAs influence<br>work engagement, while Study 2 investigated<br>Two quantitative studies involving 838 partici<br>this relationship. | FWAs                                                                                                                                                 | that allow employees the latitude to manage when,<br>where, and how they work), and work engagement<br>FWAs (i.e. job resources in the form of formal policies<br>practices as an antecdent to wellbeing                                            |

| Appendix.  (Continued) |
|------------------------|
|                        |
|                        |
|                        |
|                        |

| Sadatsafavi and Walewski<br>Study |                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|-----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                   | Method                                                                                                                                                                         | Organisational performance practices                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | WB) dimension<br>Psychological wellbeing (P                                                                                                                                                                                |
| (2013)                            | Conceptual, propositional paper framework that<br>HRM system of<br>links built environment with<br>healthcare organisations.                                                   | Physcial and built environment, ergonomics                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | for employees well-being in reducing job anxiety<br>ronment in signalling that the organisation cares<br>support e.g. providing appropriate physcial envi<br>Practices that enhance perceived organisational<br>and stress |
| Šarotar Žižek et al. (2015)       | Developing an indigenous Slovenian psycholog<br>ical wellbeing scale based on 20 interviews to<br>develop the measure, which was tested using<br>surveys from 470 participants | Autonomy/discretion, challenging work/stretch<br>assignments                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Includes positive relationship with others, autonomy<br>and self-acceptance                                                                                                                                                |
| Schabracq and Cooper<br>(1997)    | A discussion paper that reviews the notion of<br>qualitative and quantitative flexibility                                                                                      | cost-cutting, and other efficiency-orientated practices<br>redesign, autonomy. Quantitative flexibility is usually<br>Qualitative flexibility involves practices that invest in<br>human capital e.g. training and development, job<br>from the perspective of the organisation, such as | tative flexibility as they have more control over the<br>PWB is experienced by employees who enjour quali<br>work and therefore their lives (spillover).                                                                   |
| Shantz et al. (2016)              | viduals surveyed on two periods over 12 months,<br>HRM attributions and emotional exhaus<br>A quantitative study using panel data of 148 indi<br>tion model<br>testing         | Practices in maximising employee potential, and cost<br>cutting practices                                                                                                                                                                                                                | PWB represented by a degree of emotional exhaus<br>tion                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Shipton et al. (2016)             | employees and 67 line managers in four Dutch<br>A quantitative, multi-actor study involving 509<br>hospitals                                                                   | Communication of practices                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | PWB includes understanding the needs and aspira<br>tions of staff                                                                                                                                                          |
| Shuck and Reio (2014)             | Quantitative study of 216 health care employees<br>from the United States, Canada, and Japan                                                                                   | Employee engagement, practices that create a positive<br>workplace climate                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Scale. An example includes 'I am hopeful about my<br>PWB was measured using the Schwartz Outcome<br>future'                                                                                                                |
| Sloan (2008)                      | A quantitative study of 369 university employees                                                                                                                               | Practices targeted in supporting staff who experience<br>high emotional labour                                                                                                                                                                                                           | items related to participants' identification of symp<br>toms related to anxiety, depression, fearfulness,<br>Antithesis of psychological distress measured by<br>worry and restlessness                                   |
| Sparks et al. (2001)              | job insecurity, work hours, control at work, and<br>A discussion paper that examines the impact of<br>managerial style                                                         | development, employee feedback and participation<br>PWB schemes e.g. stress reduction, management                                                                                                                                                                                        | eral, a major area of discussion is the psychological<br>Although the paper discusses employee PWB in gen<br>impact of the four main issues discussed                                                                      |
| Spreitzer et al. (2005)           | A discussion paper on the concept of thriving at<br>of resilience, flourishing, wellbeing, flow, and<br>work, and comparing it to related constructs<br>self-actualisation     | Learning and development                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | condition and satisfaction with their (working) lives.<br>PWB adopts a hedonic perspective and does not<br>PWB is how people gauge their overall emotional<br>involve vitality and learning                                |

(*Continued*)

<span id="page-31-1"></span><span id="page-31-0"></span>

| Appendix.  (Continued) |
|------------------------|

| overwork<br>them<br>rewards, but at the same time causes greater anxiety<br>Flexibility in working hours, fairness in the assignment<br>Learning and development, practices involving organ<br>HR prac<br>HPWS that increases satisfaction and greater intrinsic<br>and opportunity-enhancing practice bundles, PWB<br>HR practices related to resourcing and development,<br>FWAs, learning and development (for career progres<br>Effective communication, learning and development<br>and reward and relations, commitment and satis<br>HPWS i.e. skill-enhancing, motivation-enhancing<br>Organisational performance practices<br>of work, practices that enhance organisational<br>Changing organisational values and aligning<br>intensification of work<br>tices with those values<br>citizenship behaviours<br>isational justice<br>schemes<br>faction<br>sion)<br>A discussion paper that explores the impact of high<br>performance work systems from an ethical/moral<br>medical centre, 3 regional hospitals and 7 district<br>A review paper covering 36 quantitative studies on<br>A discussion paper that explores the PWB from the<br>HRM-organisational performance published<br>sample of 661 organisations which showed that<br>Quantitative research involving 237 nurses from 1<br>contingent motivators, competitive motivators,<br>A hypotheses-testing study using multilevel data<br>A hypotheses-testing study of 129 Swedish work<br>from 1,065 employees nested within 150 work<br>the relationship between employee wellbeing<br>resource makers, and commitment maximisers<br>A quantitative study involving two-phases of a<br>units obtained from both line managers and<br>HR bundles: cost minimisers,<br>HR<br>function and practices in the overstretched<br>A discussion paper that argues for a better<br>ers in a plant undergoing closure<br>perspective (e.g. employee PWB)<br>perspective of a market logic<br>Method<br>May 2010<br>health-care sector<br>firms use 1 of 5<br>from 1995 to<br>employees<br>hospitals<br>and<br>Van De Voorde and Beijer<br>Townsend and Wilkinson<br>Van De Voorde, Paauwe,<br>and Van Veldhoven<br>Stengård et al. (2015)<br>Tsai and Wu (2010)<br>Toh et al. (2008)<br>Stormer (2008)<br>Torre (2012)<br>(2010)<br>(2015)<br>(2012)<br>Study |  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |  | WB) dimension<br>Psychological wellbeing (P                                                                                                                                                                            |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |  | during the last week have you been troubled by<br>degree of depressive symptoms e.g. 'How much<br>PWB was measured using a person's rating of the<br>worrying too much?'                                               |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |  | Specifically on the issues of contingent work and                                                                                                                                                                      |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |  | PWB is indirectly shaped by organisations' people-ori-<br>entated values related to collaboration, supportive<br>ness, information sharing, respect, and tolerance                                                     |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |  | Stress, job satisfaction, control and discretion                                                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |  | Pressures for efficiency have increased staff turnover<br>in the sector, which is characterised by an older<br>nursing workforce                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |  | indicators such flexibility in scheduling work hours,<br>and fairness of assignment of work (i.e. distributive<br>PWB (welfare) as part of job-satisfaction, includes<br>and procedural justice)                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |  | skill-enhancing, motivation-enhancing and oppor<br>employee wellbeing or performance. HPWS items<br>tunity-enhancing bundles as either promoting<br>Participants rated 26 HPWS items grouped into<br>were not provided |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |  | subjective experiences in functioning at work) and<br>health (e.g. stress) have a psychological aspect to<br>Three dimensions of employee PWB; happiness,<br>health and relationship. Both happiness (e.g.             |

<span id="page-32-0"></span>

| Appendix.  (Continued) |  |
|------------------------|--|

| Study                                                    | Method                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Organisational performance practices                                                                                                     | WB) dimension<br>Psychological wellbeing (P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
|----------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Mierlo et al. (2006)<br>van                              | A multi-level mediation analyses of data from 733<br>members of 76 healthcare teams                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Autonomy, stimulating task designs, practices that<br>stimulate learning                                                                 | example of an item is 'I feel mentally exhausted by<br>Maslach Burnout Inventory that<br>PWB was measured using psychological strain as a<br>measures 'emotional exhaustion' was used. An<br>proxy. The 5-item<br>my work'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Menezes<br>Wood and de<br>(2011)                         | 2004. Interviews were conducted with managers<br>in a total of 2,295 workplaces, while quantitative<br>This multi-method study used data from Britain's<br>Workplace Employment Relations Survey of<br>data was obtained from 22,451 employees                                                  | ment, practices that improve information sharing<br>HPWS, high involvement work practices, job enrich<br>and consultation with employees | received. The Anxiety-Contentment scale contained<br>and monetary elements such as the amount of pay<br>tinuum scale. The Job Satisfaction scale contained<br>psychological elements e.g. sense of achievement<br>job satisfaction and an Anxiety-Contentment con<br>uneasy, and worried – which are used to measure<br>Employee PWB was measured from 2 dimensions;<br>3 positive mental states – calm, contented, and<br>relaxed – and 3 negative mental states – tense,<br>the contentment dimension |
| Wood et al. (2012)                                       | 2004. Interviews were conducted with managers<br>in a total of 2,295 workplaces, while quantitative<br>This multi-method study used data from Britain's<br>Workplace Employment Relations Survey of<br>data was obtained from 22,451 employees                                                  | Enriched job design, high involvement management,<br>practices that improve job satisfaction                                             | continuum scale, similarly as used in Wood and de<br>Employee PWB was measured from 2 dimensions;<br>Job satisfaction and an Anxiety-Contentment<br>Menezes (2011)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Woodrow and Guest<br>(2014)                              | Health Service hospital in London as a case study<br>study comprised qualitative interviews with 12<br>A multi-method approach using a large National<br>tive study with 895 respondents. The second<br>over 2 years. The first study was a quantita<br>participants                            | Implementation of practice                                                                                                               | No definition of PWB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Wright (2010)                                            | is a valuable resource for maximising employee<br>An evidence-based discussion paper that argues<br>executives to realise that employee well-being<br>that it is both reasonable and highly practical<br>for both organisational scholars and business<br>health, job performance and retention | Selection practices, training, design of task environ<br>ment                                                                            | intensity' of emotional experience. PWB refers to a<br>subjective and global judgment that one is experi<br>sion of individual feelings. PWB can be contrasted<br>encing a good deal of positive and relatively little<br>PWB measures the hedonic or pleasantness dimen-<br>with measures of the level of activation or 'affect<br>negative feelings or emotions                                                                                                                                       |
| Zacharatos, Hershcovis,<br>Turner, and Barling<br>(2007) | Meta-analysis of the relationship between HPWS<br>HR policies and leadership) and<br>person- and organisation-focused outcomes<br>(work design,                                                                                                                                                 | M<br>Leadership development, JIT, TQ                                                                                                     | Job satisfaction, health, self-esteem and social sup<br>port (grouped as 'person-focused outcomes')                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Zhang et al. (2013)                                      | Quantitative. 207 clinicians (medical practitioners<br>and nurses) and administration staff from 6<br>Chinese hospitals                                                                                                                                                                         | HR practices, HPWS<br>Employees' perceptions of                                                                                          | Emotional exhaustion (i.e. burnout), work engage<br>ment and job satisfaction                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |